This is the fourth Five-Year Review of the Intersil Inc./Siemens Components Superfund Site (Site) in Cupertino, Santa Clara County, California. The purpose of this Five-Year Review is to review information from the previous five years to assess the nature of any contamination left on-site and determine whether or not the remedy remains protective of human health and the environment. General Electric (GE) has continuously operated a groundwater extraction and treatment (GWET) system at the former Intersil property since 1987. During the most recent five years, GE’s GWET system removed 51 pounds of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). GE operated a soil vapor extraction and treatment (SVET) system from 1988 to 1993 and removed 3,000 pounds of VOCs. SMI Holding Company (Siemens) has continuously operated a GWET system at the former Siemens property since 1987. During the most recent five years, Siemens’s GWET system removed 331 pounds of VOCs. Siemens operated a SVET system from 1983 to 2004 and removed 17,310 pounds of VOCs. GE and Siemens have continuously operated a GWET system in the Off-Property Study Area since 1990. During the most recent five-year review period, GE and Siemens’s Off-Property GWET system removed 89 pounds of VOCs. Groundwater concentrations continue to slowly decline. At the former Intersil property, the current maximum TCE level in the Lower A Zone is 99 micrograms per liter (µg/L) (well W12A). At the former Siemens property, the current maximum TCE level in the Upper Resaturated Interval is 1,300 µg/L. At the Off-Property Study Area, the current maximum TCE level is 61 µg/L. During the most recent five years, GE and Siemens conducted high-resolution investigations on their sites to further optimize their remediation systems. The high-resolution investigations helped to identify specific intervals with elevated VOC concentrations. GE proposes to modify its GWET system by adding one groundwater extraction well screened in the groundwater interval with elevated concentrations in the north margin of the former Intersil property. Siemens voluntarily pilot tested in-situ enhanced reductive dechlorination (ERD) remediation at the former Siemens property in 2007 and 2008. Initial results of this pilot test reportedly have shown that in-situ ERD may be effective at remediating the VOCs. The pilot study also reportedly indicates that a stall for cis-1,2-DCE reduction occurred in the Upper Resaturated Interval, and concludes that the treatment area will require bioaugmentation. However, declining groundwater levels in the Upper Resaturated Interval prevents further pilot testing at this time.
