Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 148-acre American Brass Inc. (ABI) Superfund site is located north of Dothan in Henry County, Alabama, on State Highway 134. The site includes a 24-acre area where ABI operated a secondary brass smelter and foundry between 1978 and 1992. ABI leased the site through the Henry County Industrial Development Board while operating. Soil and groundwater contamination occurred because of facility operations.  Beginning in 1996, in cooperation with the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM), the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency led the site investigation and cleanup activities. The EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1999. Site contamination does not currently threaten local residents living near the site. Contamination has not affected local residents’ drinking water wells. The EPA and ADEM continue to make sure residents and the environment are protected from site contamination. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
1996
In 1996, at the request of ADEM, the EPA conducted a removal action to address short-term risks at the site. During this removal action, the EPA consolidated several materials with the ball mill residue, piled by ABI, at the southeast corner of the site; these materials included excavated lead-contaminated soils, contaminated furnace bricks, and process waste materials (ball mill residue) found inside the buildings. The consolidated waste pile was then covered with a liner. 1998
The EPA completed a second removal action to remove the waste pile and dispose of the materials off site. 2006
The EPA issued a cleanup plan (Record of Decision, or ROD) to address site contaminants. The selected cleanup approach included monitored natural attenuation (MNA) of the ground water beneath the site, in which natural processes act to reduce concentrations of contaminants in ground water to acceptable levels. The selected cleanup also included excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soils/sediment. 2009
Construction activities were completed in 2009 and included the off-site disposal of 109,836 tons of contaminated soils and sediment.  With completion of the soil/sediment portion of the cleanup, site soils can support unrestricted uses, including residential use. However, use of the shallow groundwater will be restricted until contaminant levels have attenuated to safe levels. The EPA also issued an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) to update cleanup standards for boron and iron; in addition, the ESD clarified the need for building decontamination (completed by the EPA during removal action work in the late 1990s) and demolition of site buildings. 2010
Beginning in 2010, regular sampling has been conducted to monitor the contaminant levels in the shallow ground water beneath the site. Two residences border the site to the east and a third residence borders the site to the southwest. The private drinking water wells at these residences have also been tested and are not impacted by the site. 2013
In May 2013, a fire damaged the roof of the main foundry building.  Due to the asbestos issues associated with this building, the site owners had it demolished and recycled in 2014. 2014
As part of the 2006 remedy, the EPA anticipated that ground water would meet cleanup goals within a 30-year timeframe, while the Five-Year Review conducted in 2014 found that contaminant levels had not decreased significantly. 2019
The second Five-Year Review was published by the EPA in 2019 and determined again that contaminant levels had not decreased significantly in shallow groundwater beneath the site. For groundwater restoration such as that occurring at the site, the Superfund law calls for the State to assume the O&M of the remedy after ten years, to maintain the remedy effectiveness. At this site, that ten year period ended in August 2019. However, the groundwater remedy has not been shown to be effective. In April 2019, an environmental covenant was placed on the site that restricts the use of the contaminated groundwater beneath the site. 2020
In January 2020, a Remedy Optimization Study was begun for the groundwater remedy at the site. As part of the RO Study, a site visit was made on February 20, 2020. The RO Study will be finalized by the end of May. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the April 2020 groundwater sampling event was cancelled by the State. 2024
The third Five-Year Review was published by the EPA in 2024 and determined that the current remedy at the site is protective of human health and the enviroment. The Groundwater was sampled on December 7, 2023 and the results show that the contaminates have not decreased significantly since the previous review. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published by the EPA in 2024. The remedy is protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Under a cooperative agreement with EPA, the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM) conducted the monitoring of groundwater in 2021 and 2024. Until the ground water contamination has attenuated to acceptable levels, the EPA will conduct Five-Year Reviews to ensure the remedy remains protective of human health and environment. A Remedy Optimization Study for the groundwater remedy was finalized in May 2020. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Use of the shallow groundwater is restricted until contaminant levels have attenuated to safe levels. An environmental covenant was placed on the site in April 2019. The site is currently in use for the production of agricultural goods such as cotton and sod, by the current owner. Top of Page