MOUNTAIN VIEW MOBILE HOME ESTATESGLOBE, AZ 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 17-acre Mountain View Mobile Homes site sits on the site of the former Metate Asbestos Corporation’s chrysotile asbestos mill. Mill activities contaminated groundwater and soil at the site with asbestos. After cleanup, EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1988. The State of Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) oversees the Declaration of Environmental Use in place to ensure on-going protection of human health and the environment. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site was addressed through federal and state actions. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review in 2020 concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy included permanently relocating mobile home residents, cleaning up the site, demolishing and burying homes and a sewage treatment plant, closing the site by covering it with either clay or a synthetic material, placing clean soil on top of the site, fencing the area, and periodically inspecting and maintaining the site. Permanent relocation of residents finished in 1985. Construction of the remedy finished in 1986. After cleanup, EPA took the site off the NPL in 1988. Annual inspections and inspections following inclement weather continue to be conducted along with regular mowing, brush removal and routine maintenance. In May 2015, the EPA finalized an Explanation of Significance Difference (ESD) to the Record of Decision (ROD) making the institutional controls imposed by ADEQ’s Declaration of Environmental Use Restriction (DEUR) part of the final remedy for the site.  Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Site cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In 1980, the state provided temporary housing for residents while decontamination activities took place. Removal actions included demolition of old mill buildings and covering of contaminated soil with topsoil. Wind, water and public activity later eroded the soil covering, exposing the asbestos tailings.
Top of Page