Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The entire area of the Indian Bend Wash site (IBW site) covers about 13 square miles in Scottsdale and Tempe, Arizona. There are many industrial facilities located within the IBW site. Up until the 1970s, before current environmental regulations existed, industrial solvents containing volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) were typically disposed of directly onto the ground or in dry wells. These disposal practices, along with other releases, resulted in the soil and groundwater contamination at the site. EPA divided the site into two areas, known as North Indian Bend Wash (NIBW) and South Indian Bend Wash (SIBW) because the groundwater contamination plumes came from different industrial sources and are located in separate basins divided by the Salt River.  NIBW and SIBW are on separate cleanup tracks, as discussed below.  Here are links to animations that show how concentrations in the MAU and LAU have changed over time as a result of EPA's groundwater extraction and treatment remedy. MAU Groundwater Plume over time: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/09/100034007 LAU ﻿Groundwater Plume over time: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/09/100034006 Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA is addressing NIBW separately from SIBW because the contaminants came from different sources and the groundwater plumes are not connected. North Indian Bend Wash (NIBW), Scottsdale, AZ Remedy for Soil  The long-term remedy for NIBW soils, selected in the 1991 Record of Decision (ROD), required soil vapor extraction (SVE) to clean up contaminated soil in three former industrial souce areas and continued monitoring of the upper aquifer (UAU). SVE was required at Area 7, Area 8 and Area 12 because it was determined that these areas could continue to contaminate the groundwater. A voluntary SVE cleanup was also performed at Area 6. The cleanup standards specified in the NIBW 1991 ROD were based on groundwater protection criteria and have been satisfied at all of these sites. Remedy for Groundwater: The long-term remedy for NIBW groundwater selected in the 1988 ROD includes extraction and treatment. Currently, groundwater extraction and treatment is ongoing at five treatment plants. The oldest, the Central Groundwater Treatment Facility (CGTF), has been operating since 1994. The CGTF treats the contaminated groundwater using air stripping technology and provides treated water to the City of Scottsdale to blend into their municipal water supply.  The newest plant, the Northern Groundwater Treatment Facility (NGTF), next to the Miller Road Treatment Facility (MRTF) began operating in 2013 and both of these plants provide plume containment and treatment for the northern end of the groundwater plume. The NGTF uses Granular Activated Carbon (GAC) to remove contaminants and the treated water is also blended into the potable supply. Two other groundwater extraction and treatment plants are located at Source Areas 7 and 12 to contain and treat the most contaminated groundwater. At Area 7 extracted water is treated by UV Oxidation followed by air stripping before being re-injected into the upper aquifer as part of the plume containment. At  Area 12 extracted water is treated by air stripping before being discharged to the Salt River Project (SRP) lateral irrigation canal.  Groundwater at the NIBW site is present in three aquifer layers. These layers are referred to in the technical documents provided on this webpage as the Upper, Middle and Lower Alluvial Units, or "UAU", "MAU" and "LAU".  Water quality in the upper aquifer, called the "UAU" is close to meeting the cleanup goals in most of the NIBW monitoring wells.  Most of the remaining contamination is now found within the deeper MAU and LAU aquifer layers. The cleanup of NIBW groundwater plumes will still take many more decades. Here are links to animations that show how concentrations in the MAU and LAU have changed over time as a result of EPA's groundwater extraction and treatment remedy. LAU Groundwater Pume over time:  https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/09/100034006 and  MAU Groundwater Plume over time: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/09/100034007    History of NIBW Groundwater Remedy Decisions :   The first Record of Decision for groundwater extraction and treatment was signed in 1988.   After construction and initial operation of this remedy it became apparent that the groundwater contamination in the middle and lower parts of the aquifer had not been contained or captured and that the CGTF was not adequately controlling and treating the groundwater plume. As a result, more actions were needed, which included installing 24 new monitoring wells and two﻿ new extraction wells, construction of the Miller Road Treatment Facility (MRTF) at the north end of the groundwater plume, construction of additonal source area treatment plants at Areas 7 and 12  and other improvements.  These voluntary actions were described in  EPA's 2001 final Record of Decision Amendment as the "Remedy Enhancements". EPA's remedy was further modified by an Explanation of Significant Differences in 2012 to add a fifth treatment plant (NGTF) to extract and treat water and control the northern end of the LAU groundwater plume. In addition to the actions required by the original 1988 ROD, the final remedy includes: 
construction of the Northern Groundwater Treatment Facility (NGTF);
 the Remedy Enhancements doumented in the 2001 ROD described above;
one new extraction well and one new recharge well;
continued evaluation of groundwater conditions using the groundwater model; and
contingency actions for Area 7 and Area 12 groundwater plumes. 
Construction of the NIBW final groundwater remedy was completed in 2013. In 2016, EPA's Second Five Year Review required a re-evaluation of the remedy's protectivness in response to the new lower toxcicity values that had been set for trichlororthylene (TCE), the main contaminant of concern at NIBW. EPA re-evaluated risks from air stripper vapor emissions to the atmosphere from all five groundwater extraction and treatment facilities and found that the remedies remain protective as long as the carbon treatment for vapor emission control contines. Recent Vapor Intrusion Investigations Vapor Intrusion is a process by which chemical vapors and gasses in contaminated soils can enter buildings though foundation cracks and pipes. EPA was not aware of this potential exposure pathway at the time the remedies were selected.  EPA's 2016 Second Five Year Review of the remedies for Indian Bend Wash recommended evaluating all former NIBW and SIBW source areas for potential vapor intrusion, considering that 1) there could still be contamination present in site soils, and 2) the toxicity values for TCE had changed. In general, EPA does not consider vapor intrusion to be a problem for properties over the NIBW groundwater plume because the depth to groundwater contamination in the MAU is typically more than 200 feet below ground surface and the relatively clean water in upper aquifer (UAU) provides a barrier between the the groundwater contamination and the surface.   In response to the 2016 Five Year Review recommendations, soil gas samples were collected around all former NIBW and SIBW industrial source areas found to have contributed to the groundwater contamination. No further action was found to be necessary at any former SIBW source areas as all were found to meet the updated industrial screening critera for vapor intrusion risk. At NIBW, only Area 7, the former Rolemech/Siemens facility located in downtown Scottsdale was identified for additional action to address vapor intrusion.  As of 2023, all nearby buildings within NIBW Area 7 with identified vapor intrusion concerns have been modified with sub-slab depressurization systems to protect building occupants. Sub-slab depressurization is a simple building modification commonly used to address radon, which entails cutting a hole in the building foundation and running a pipe through to the roof with exhaust fan to keep vapors from the soil from entering indoor air. EPA is also currently discussing plans with the NIBW Participating Companies to complete a focused Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study ("RI/FS") to better define the remaining soil contamination at Area 7 and evaluate alternatives to address the vapor intrusion source over the long term. When completed, the public will have an opportunity to comment on the Proposed Plan for the NIBW Area 7 final vapor intrusion remedy. South Indian Bend Wash (SIBW) Tempe, AZ Remedy for Soil: The 1993 Record of Decision (ROD) selected Soil Vapor Extraction (SVE) to clean up soils contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and established criteria for determining when and where SVE would be required to protect groundwater at the former industrial sources EPA identifed as "subsites". SVE was was required and completed at the former DCE Circuits subsite, and voluntary cleanup was completed at Unitog and APS subsites. EPA determined that ten other subsites did not need soil cleanup to protect groundwater, including: Eldon Drapery, Circuit Express, Allstate Mine Supply, Desert Sportswear, Cerprobe, Service and Sales, IMC Magnetics, Prestige Drapery. the City of Tempe Right-of-Way, and the Former Landfills subsites.﻿ The 2016 Second Five Year Review for Indian Bend Wash required re-evaluation of all SIBW subsites for vapor intrusion risk.  EPA collected soil gas samples of all former SIBW source areas and no further action was required for vapor intrusion at any of the subsites mentioned above. Remedy for Groundwater: the long-term remedy for SIBW groundwater selected in the 1998 Record of Decision (ROD) addressed three groundwater plumes: the western plume, the central plume and the eastern plume. The remedy selected for the central and eastern plumes was monitored natural attenuation (MNA), while extraction and treatment was specified for the western plume.  The ROD was amended in 2004 after the western plume was also found to be cleaning up naturally and extraction and treatment would not be needed.  In 2013, A pilot test of In-Situ Chemical Oxidation using permanganate injection was applied to the eastern plume to speed up the cleanup.  At the time it was estimated that it would take 10 to 30 years for the eastern plume to achieve cleanup levels if left to degrade naturally. As of 2016, all SIBW monitoring wells across the site met the cleanup goals for volatile organic chemicals (VOCs).  The Remedial Action Completion Report for the original remedy to address chlorinated solvents in groundwater was finalized in 2020. Recently, new contaminants, per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) were discovered in three City of Tempe Municipal supply wells above the federal health advisory of 70 parts per trillion.  The City has stopped using these wells for drinking water until treatment to remove PFAS is installed. EPA sampled and discovered PFAS in the SIBW ground water monitoring wells and is now launching a new Rremedial Investigation and Feasibility Study into the nature and extent of PFAS contamination in Tempe to develop and evaluate cleanup alternatives for these new contaminants. Once completed, the public will have opportunity to comment on the Proposed Plan for the PFAS cleanup. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Significant progress has been made to date towards acheivement of cleanup objectives.  In Scottsdale, over 145  billion gallons of water have been treated, removing over 99,205 lbs of trichloroethylene.  The NIBW remedy is currently undergoing a Remedy Optimization review to evaluate ways to enhance the performance of the remedy. EPA is also beginning a new vapor intrusion investigation to address remaining soil contamination at NIBW Area 7 impact to indoor air. Groundwater in the area of Tempe has already met the cleanup objectives for volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) required by the 1998 Record of Decision. A new investigation is underway to address the newly discovered per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) contamination. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Land uses near the IBW site include residential and industrial/commercial areas, agricultural uses, recreation areas, undeveloped open space and waterways. Wells cannot be drilled in the state of Arizona without a permit from the Arizona Department of Water Resources (ADWR). EPA works with ADWR to coordinate the cleanup efforts at the IBW site. If someone applied for a well permit, ADWR would inform them of the risks of using the groundwater.Wells cannot be drilled in the state of Arizona without a permit from the Arizona Department of Water Resources (ADWR). Three City of Tempe municipal supply wells were suspended from drinking water production after per- and poly-fluroalkyl substances (PFAS) were discovered. The City plans to bring those wells back into service once treatment technologies are installed on the wells so the water can again be blended into the municpal supply to meet federal drinking water standards. In Scottsdale, groundwater is being treated by air stripping and carbon filtration and blended into the pubilc water supply to meet federal drinking water standards.The City of Scottsdale Water District also regularly monitors the drinking water supply for PFAS. The two main treatment plants which supply water to Scottsdale already have capablity to remove PFAS before it can enter the public drinking water supply. The NGTF utilizing Granular Activated Carbon treatment and the City's new reverse osmosis treatment plant located next to the CGTF are already capable of removing PFAS. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
In Summer 2023, EPA began field investigations for groundwater and soil sampling to evaluate the extent and potential sources of per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in Tempe groundwater. Groundwater has been monitored by the NIBW Participating Companies on a quarterly and annual basis at NIBW throughout the duration of the project. EPA is discussing plans with them to better characterize the remaining soil contamination within NIBW Area 7 and to sample NIBW groundwater for PFAS. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
EPA and the State of Arizona have been involved in investigations and cleanup activities at the IBW site since the initial discovery of VOCs in the groundwater in 1981.  In Scottsdale, the NIBW Participating Companies (including Motorola, Siemens, GlaxoSmithKlein, The Salt River Project, and the City of Scottsdale) are working together under a Consent Decree to complete the cleanup under EPA oversight. At SIBW in Tempe, EPA has been  carrying out the cleanup following cash-out settlements with potentially responsible parties. Currently, EPA is leading the new Remedial Investigation for per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) as the source(s) are unknown. Top of Page