Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 866-acre Hunters Point Naval Shipyard site is located in San Francisco, California. The site was home to a shipyard from 1945 to 1974 and the Naval Radiological Defense Laboratory (NRDL) from 1948 to 1960. NRDL activities contaminated soil, dust, sediments, surface water and groundwater with petroleum fuels, pesticides, heavy metals, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and radionuclides. Soil at the site contains naturally occurring asbestos and metals. Cleanup, operation and maintenance activities, and monitoring are ongoing.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Navy is the lead agency responsible for the investigation and cleanup of the site. U.S. EPA is the lead regulatory agency. U.S. EPA and the California EPA oversee and enforce Navy cleanup actions. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the IR Site 07/18’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. Continued protectiveness of the remedy requires institutional controls to prevent exposure to contaminants and certain future land uses. The most recent five-year review concluded that EPA expects the remedies for parcels B, C, D-1, G, UC-1 and UC-2 to be protective of human health and the environment upon completion. In the interim, remedial activities completed to date have adequately addressed all exposure pathways that could result in unacceptable risk in these areas. Continued protectiveness of the remedy requires completion of remedial activities and institutional controls to prevent exposure to contaminants and certain future land uses.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The Navy has divided the site into several subsites to organize and prioritize cleanup activities. Parcel A: EPA selected “no further action” as the long-term remedy; conditions are protective of human health and the environment. The Navy transferred Parcel A to the San Francisco Redevelopment Agency in 2004. Installation Restoration (IR) Sites 07/18: The Navy has lowered contaminant levels in soils and sediments by removing contaminated soil, placing covers on upland areas and installing a revetment along the shoreline. Access controls prevent exposure to contaminants. Parcel B: The long-term remedy included excavation and disposal of soils, installation of soil covers, installation of a revetment along the shoreline, a soil vapor extraction system to remove VOCs, groundwater treatment, removal of radiologically contaminated structures, monitoring and institutional controls to maintain the remedy in the long term and prevent exposure to contaminants. Excavation and disposal of contaminated soil finished in 2010. Construction of the covers and revetment, operation of the soil vapor extraction system and treatment of contaminated groundwater are ongoing. Access restrictions prevent exposure to contaminants. Parcel C: The long-term remedy included excavation and disposal of soils, installation of soil covers, installation of a revetment along the shoreline, a soil vapor extraction system to remove VOCs, groundwater treatment, removal of radiologically contaminated structures, monitoring and institutional controls to maintain the remedy in the long term and prevent exposure to contaminants. Soil excavation and disposal, groundwater treatment, soil vapor extraction and radiological removal activities are ongoing. The Navy will finish covering contaminated soils after it finishes removing radiologically contaminated soils. Access restrictions prevent exposure to contaminants. Parcel D-1: The long-term remedy included excavation and disposal of soils, installation of soil covers, groundwater treatment, removal of radiologically contaminated structures, monitoring and institutional controls to maintain the remedy in the long term and prevent exposure to contaminants. Groundwater treatment using zero valent iron injection finished in 2008. Excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil and removal of soil stockpiles finished in 2010. Radiological removals are ongoing. The Navy will finish removing and covering contaminated soils after it finishes radiological removal activities. Access restrictions prevent exposure to contaminants. Parcel D-2: After removal actions removed contaminated soils and structures at the subsite, EPA selected “no further action” as the final remedy in 2010. Parcel G: The long-term remedy included excavation and disposal of soils, installation of soil covers, groundwater treatment, removal of radiologically contaminated structures, monitoring and institutional controls to maintain the remedy in the long term and prevent exposure to contaminants. Groundwater treatment using zero valent iron injection finished in 2008. Excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil and removal of soil stockpiles finished in 2010. Construction of covers is ongoing. The radiologically related parts of the remedy are complete and unrestricted release of radionuclides is ongoing. Access restrictions prevent exposure to contaminants. Parcel UC-1: The long-term remedy included soil covers, soil gas surveys, removal of radiologically contaminated structures, monitoring and institutional controls to prevent exposure to contaminants. The Navy has lowered contaminant levels in soils and sediments by removing and covering contaminated soils. Soil vapor survey activities are ongoing. The radiologically related parts of the remedy are complete and unrestricted release of radionuclides is ongoing. Parcel UC-2: The long-term remedy included soil covers, removal of radiologically contaminated structures, monitored natural attenuation, soil gas surveys, monitoring and institutional controls to prevent exposure to contaminants. The Navy has lowered contaminant levels in soils and sediments by removing and covering contaminated soils. Monitored natural attenuation, which involves letting naturally occurring processes reduce the contamination in groundwater, will reduce levels of radiological and chemical contaminants at the subsite. Parcels E, E-2, F and UC-3: The Navy has conducted several removal actions at these subsites, including removal and disposal of contaminated soils and debris, construction of a landfill cap and removal of radiological contamination. EPA has selected a long-term remedy for Parcel E-2. It included removal and disposal of contaminated soils, radiological surveys, installation of a soil cover with a protective liner, below-ground barriers to limit groundwater flow between the landfill and the San Francisco Bay, removal and treatment of landfill gas, installation of a revetment along the shoreline, monitoring, and institutional controls to prevent exposure to contaminants. Remedial investigation activities, operation and maintenance activities, and monitoring are ongoing for these subsites. EPA has not conducted five-year reviews for these subsites. The Navy conducts activities to keep the Bayview-Hunters Point community and general public up-to-date on the cleanup work at the Shipyard. The Navy uses a variety of venues including public meetings three times a year and presentations at neighborhood meetings, events, clubs and institutions. The Navy also routinely issues fact sheets and conducts bus tours of the Shipyard. All of the Navy’s community involvement activities are outlined in the Navy’s Hunters Point Naval Shipyard Community Involvement Plan (CIP). The Navy’s Community Involvement Manager can be reached by phone at (415) 295-4645 or email at info@sfhpns.com. --- To learn more about the U.S. Navy’s cleanup at Hunters Point Naval Shipyard (HPNS) and access documents, go to:  www.bracpmo.navy.mil/BRAC-Bases/California/Former-Naval-Shipyard-Hunters-Point/Documents/#radiological
For information about the HPNS Radiological Cleanup, go to: www.bracpmo.navy.mil/hpnsrc  
