J.H. BAXTER & CO.WEED, CA 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 205-acre J.H. Baxter & Co. site, partially owned by J.H. Baxter Company and partially by Roseburg Forest Products, has been used continuously for wood treatment and related activities since 1937. Contaminants such as arsenic, carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (cPAHs), pentachlorophenol (PCP), and dioxins were identified on site. Following construction of the site’s long-term remedy, operation and maintenance activities and monitoring are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. Actions include: 
Cleanup of contaminated surface soils, whether inside or outside of the DNAPL zone, and contaminated subsurface (deeper than two feet) outside of the NAPL zone in accordance with the ROD, with certain modifications.
Excavation of soils contaminated with organics and biological treatment in lined treatment cells with onsite disposal after treatment in a lined, RCRA-equivalent disposal cell.
Excavation of the soils contaminated with inorganics and chemical fixation followed by onsite disposal in RCRA-equivalent disposal cells for treated soils designated as hazardous waste.
Excavation of the soils contaminated with both organic and inorganic constituents, biological treatment in treatment cells, chemical fixation and onsite disposal in a lined, RCRA equivalent disposal cell.
Covering surface soils containing inorganics at concentrations above background and below the 1990 ROD subsurface soil excavation standards with an asphaltic concrete wearing surface
Bioventing of Area B soils.﻿
Natural attenuation of drainage ditch sediments
Ongoing extraction of contaminated groundwater followed by biological treatment and chemical precipitation, polishing and discharge on-site after treatment.
Enhancements of the groundwater remedy described in the 1990 ROD by constructing a slurry wall around the DNAPL zone.
Institutional controls through recordation of land use covenants.
Covering these soils with a protective asphaltic concrete surface, rather than excavating and reburying the soils on-site at a depth greater than two feet.
Bioventing of Area B soils (completed prior to slurry wall construction)
Construction of a RCRA-equivalent disposal cell and related activities
Institutional controls 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is being addressed in two stages: immediate actions and a long-term remedial phase focused on cleanup of the entire site. Immediate Actions: In 1986, the potentially responsible parties (PRPs) fenced the site to prevent direct contact with the site contaminants. Entire Site: The site’s long-term remedy, selected in 1990 and updated in 1998 and 2001, included slurry wall containment of a creosote DNAPL zone, groundwater extraction, treatment and on-site discharge, soil treatment and placement of treated soils in a containment cell on site, asphalt concrete wearing surface, and institutional controls. The most recent Five-Year Review Report, completed in 2020, concluded that the remedy is protective of human health and the environment. Top of Page