COAST WOOD PRESERVINGUKIAH, CA 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Coast Wood Preserving site is an 8-acre, former wood treatment facility located three miles south of Ukiah, California. Past operations have resulted in chromium and arsenic contamination of the soil and groundwater underlying the facility. Following immediate actions to protect human health and the environment, and construction of the site’s long-term remedy, groundwater treatment and monitoring are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. Although the site is listed on the NPL, the state is the lead regulatory agency for the site and is therefore the primary contact.EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. EPA will continue to monitor the site and conduct additional Five Year Reviews.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is being addressed in two stages: immediate actions and a long-term remedial phase focusing on cleanup of the entire site. Immediate Actions: In 1981, the North Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board issued an order requiring Coast Wood Preserving to establish measures to stop the release of toxic waste. Later that year, the company was referred to the Board for violation of the order. The court subsequently issued an injunction, requiring that the company perform the cleanup. It was later determined that Coast Wood Preserving was not complying with the injunction. In 1983, Coast Wood Preserving, under EPA oversight, began pumping out the contaminated groundwater plume and storing it on site. Subsequently, the company built a slurry wall and an interceptor trench to prevent the off-site migration of contaminated groundwater. A groundwater extraction well was installed to pump the contaminated groundwater. An injection well, where Coast Wood Preserving injected treated water, was built downgradient from the site. Other activities included grading and building berms to prevent surface water runoff from the operations area. Long-Term Cleanup: The site’s long-term remedy included in-place reduction and fixation of hexavalent chromium using calcium polysulfide reductant to address groundwater contamination and excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil. These actions have effectively reduced the potential for exposure to hazardous materials. Soil cleanup in accessible areas finished in early 1990. Groundwater treatment will continue until established cleanup goals are met. Coast Wood also made changes to operations at the facility, including elimination and replacement of its wood treatment solution. In June 2018, Coast Wood Preserving ceased operations and closed down the facility. Subsequently, because previously inaccessible areas became accessible for remediation and facility process equipment was removed, between August 2018 and November 2019, approximately 3,700 tons of contaminated soil was dug up and removed from the site. Injections of Calcium Polysulfide are currently underway in to address hexavalent chromium in groundwater in these areas that previously could not be accessed. Long term monitoring of these remedial actions and follow-up Calcium Polysulfide injections, if necessary, will continue until site cleanup objectives have been met. Injections of Calcium Polysulfide are currently underway to address hexavalent chromium in groundwater in these areas that previously could not be accessed. Long term monitoring of these remedial actions and follow-up Calcium Polysulfide injections, if necessary will continue until site cleanup objectives have been met. Top of Page