Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The United Heckathorn Co. Superfund site is located on the eastern shore of San Francisco Bay in an industrial area of the city of Richmond, California, and is made up of two adjacent areas:  
an upland area with contaminated soils, and  
a marine area with contaminated sediments in harbor channels, including Lauritzen Channel, Parr Canal, Santa Fe Channel, and Richmond Inner Harbor.  
From the mid-1940s to the mid-1960s, several companies used the site to process, package, and ship pesticides, particularly with dichlorodiphenyl trichloroethane (DDT) and dieldrin. Poor management and housekeeping practices during the site’s use as a pesticide processing facility released contaminants of concern (DDT and dieldrin) to upland soils and marine sediments. Superfund cleanup plan: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) listed the site on the National Priorities List in 1990, which allowed funds to begin an investigation to develop a cleanup plan, or remedy, for the site. On October 26, 1994, EPA, with a robust public comment process, selected a remedy that consisted of capping the contaminated upland soils and dredging and offsite disposal of contaminated marine sediments. Major components of the cleanup plan documented in EPA’s Record of Decision (ROD) included: 
Dredging of all Younger Bay Mud from the Lauritzen Channel and Parr Canal, with offsite disposal of dredge material.
Placement of clean material after dredging.
Construction of a 5-acre upland cap around the former United Heckathorn facility to prevent erosion.
A deed restriction limiting use of the property at the former United Heckathorn facility location to non-residential uses.
Marine monitoring to verify the effectiveness of the remedy.
The United Heckathorn Superfund site remedy for the upland area, capping of contaminated soils combined with routine monitoring and maintenance to prevent both human exposure and erosion, is protective of human health and the environment. Marine cleanup strategy not protective: However, the remedy for the marine area of the site is not protective of human health and the environment. Total DDT and dieldrin concentrations reported in Lauritzen Channel sediment, surface water, and tissue sampling of marine organisms results have regularly exceeded set cleanup goal levels since 1999. Marine area sediments continue to present unacceptable risks to both human and ecological receptors.  Do not eat fish or shellfish caught in the Lauritzen Channel. See OEHHA’s fish advisory for more information.  As a result, a new remedial action at the marine area of the site is required to ensure protection of human health and the environment. As of 2024, EPA is currently investigating additional cleanup options to address this issue. 
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Upland Area: Construction of the concrete cap at the upland area began in July 1998 and was completed in July 1999. Over most of the 5-acre cap, the cap is comprised of reinforced concrete; a geotextile fabric and gravel cap in the railroad track area.  The cap design included installation of a drainage system to collect surface runoff for stormwater pollution prevention. The Record of Decision (ROD), however, does not set a remediation level for stormwater discharge from the upland cap area. Prior to May 2014, site stormwater discharges went to the publicly owned treatment works. In response to third-party litigation regarding stormwater violations, Levin Richmond Terminal installed an on-site treatment system in 2014, at a central location on the western edge of the upland area. Stormwater from five interceptors is now pumped to this treatment system, which uses flocculation, settling, and sand filtration to remove contaminants. Influent and effluent to the treatment system is sampled monthly. In accordance with the discharge permit, treated stormwater is then discharged to the Lauritzen Channel via an outfall at the western edge of the upland area.  Pursuant to the ROD, on August 2, 1996, the property owner of the upland area recorded an environmental restriction covenant, which limits the property to non-residential use. Marine Area: Sediment dredging of Lauritzen Channel and Parr Canal at the marine area began in August 1996 and was completed in March 1997. Montrose Chemical Corporation of California, Inc. performed the remedial action. Approximately 107,000 cubic yards of sediment was transported by rail from the site and disposed of at designated disposal facilities.  After completion of the dredging operation, sediment samples were taken at the dredging area to confirm that the remedial action had been effective.  An average of 18 inches of clean sand was placed over the dredged areas for the purpose of site restoration.  Five-Year Reviews: EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. Upland area: The most recent review in 2021 concluded that the remedy at the upland area of the United Heckathorn Superfund Site is protective of human health and the environment. Capping of contaminated soil has eliminated human exposure pathways and prevented erosion. Routine inspection and monitoring assure the protectiveness of the upland remedy at the site. Marine area: The most recent review at the marine area of the site concluded that the remedy at the marine area of the site is not protective because concentrations of total DDT and dieldrin in sediment, surface water, and tissue samples of marine organisms in the Lauritzen Channel exceed remediation goals. Re-evaluation of the risk to human health and ecological receptors in 2010 indicates that sediment in Lauritzen Channel continues to pose a risk. A new remedial action will need to be implemented to ensure protectiveness. A new remedial action requires a Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) to determine what remedial actions can address DDT and dieldrin in sediment, water, and tissues. A new remedial action is currently being assessed (2024) to ensure protectiveness. 
What Is the Current Site Status?
Sediment, surface water, and tissue data in the Lauritzen Channel continue to exceed remediation goals nearly twenty years after the remedy implementation. Do not eat fish or shellfish caught in the Lauritzen Channel. See OEHHA’s fish advisory for more information.   EPA is currently evaluating data and technologies to select a new remedy that addresses the remaining contamination in the Lauritzen Channel and prevents recontamination from occurring.  To make progress towards selecting a permanent remedy at the marine area, EPA is currently participating in mediation with Potentially Responsible Parties.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
At this site, activity and use limitation that EPA calls institutional contols are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use. They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions can prevent Superfund site land to be used for particular purposes like residential use. For more background, see Institutional Controls. Pursuant to the ROD (Record of Decision), Institutional controls (ICs) were implemented at the site in 1996. On August 2, 1996, the property owner of the upland area recorded an environmental restriction covenant, which limits the property to non-residential use.
Sampling and Monitoring
Surface water sampling results found that concentrations of DDT and dieldrin are highest at the mid-point of Lauritzen Channel where there has been regular exceedances of the surface water remediation levels for total DDT and dieldrin. Surface water samples collected from Santa Fe Canal and Richmond Inner Harbor have consistently contained the lowest concentrations of DDT and dieldrin within the data set. The most recent sediment samples from Lauritzen Channel (2013) are above 1994 remediation levels. While there has been an apparent drop in average sediment concentrations since 1999, surface sediment concentrations in Lauritzen Channel are frequently observed to be one to two orders of magnitude above the remediation level. Recent data collected in 2013 indicates that concentrations of DDT in sediments in the Santa Fe Channel are below the remediation level. DDT concentrations in mussel tissue samples collected from the Lauritzen Channel have not decreased significantly since the remedial action was implemented. Fish tissue data sampled and analyzed in 2008 and 2013, reported concentrations of total DDT above issued advisory, or remediation, levels. Fish were collected from five biomonitoring locations in 2008: two in the Lauritzen Channel, one in Santa Fe Channel, one in Parr Canal, and one in Richmond Inner Harbor. The fish species collected included shiner surfperch, bay shrimp, anchovy, staghorn sculpin, starry flounder, walleyed perch, sanddabs, California halibut, bay goby, and jacksmelt. White croaker, a target fish species, was not caught. Fish were collected in 2013 from the Santa Fe Channel, Ferry Point, and Sheridan Point. Fish species captured and processed during this event included barred surfperch, white surfperch, shiner surfperch, and jacksmelt. DDT and dieldrin contaminant concentrations regularly exceed remediation standards in Lauritzen Channel for all media types (surface water, sediment, and tissue) and analysis of the data collected indicate this trend will continue unless additional remedial actions are implemented.﻿
