CRAZY HORSE SANITARY LANDFILLSALINAS, CA 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Crazy Horse Sanitary Landfill site is a 125-acre sanitary landfill in Salinas, California. A landfill has operated on site since 1950. The landfill is owned by the City of Salinas and operated by Salinas Disposal Services. The facility receives about 162,000 tons of refuse a year. Landfill operations contaminated groundwater with hazardous chemicals. Following initial actions to protect human health and the environment, EPA is evaluating whether additional cleanup measures are needed. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, municipal and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) is the lead agency overseeing the cleanup.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Covering portions of the landfill and treating the groundwater have 
reduced the potential of exposure to contaminated materials at the site 
while investigations are being completed. Groundwater treatment, 
leachate recovery and landfill gas recovery are ongoing.About 6 
acres of the landfill were closed in 1988 and covered with a 
high-density polyethylene membrane and two feet of soil. Dewatered, 
digested sewage sludge was placed on top of the area to promote 
revegetation. The southeastern edge of the area was lined with bales of 
straw to retard surface water runoff. The city also pumped water from 
wells in an attempt to stabilize the groundwater contamination. Six 
extraction wells initially were installed as an interim measure, 
followed by the installation of 17 additional wells to completely 
capture the migrating plume. Adjacent residential wells were either 
permanently sealed or converted into extraction or monitoring wells. 
Contaminated water was pumped from the extraction wells and treated by 
air stripping. Treated water is stored in collection tanks and then 
either reinjected into the ground through 27 recharge wells or used for 
dust control.Cleanup ProgressEPA is reviewing the effectiveness of initial cleanup actions to determine whether additional cleanup measures are needed.
Top of Page