CELTOR CHEMICAL WORKSHOOPA, CA
  Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 26-acre Celtor Chemical Works site, located in the central Hoopa Valley Indian Reservation, is the location of a former ore concentrating facility that processed sulfide ore. The mill was in operation from 1960-1962 and processed ore from the nearby Copper Bluff Mine. Waste from the milling operations and processed ore generated acidic runoff and elevated metals concentrations in the soils throughout the site. The site was added to the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983. In 1985, the EPA issued a Record of Decision selecting excavation and off-site disposal as the preferred remedy. After cleanup, EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 2003. In 2016, additional tailings were discovered at the site. This prompted a new investigation into potential contamination that has been ongoing since 2017.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site was addressed through federal actions. In 1983, EPA initiated an interim remedial measure and removed approximately 1,400 cubic yards of contaminated material and disposed of it in a Class I hazardous waste landfill. In the 1985 Record of Decision, EPA selected excavation and off-site disposal as the preferred remedy for the site. The remedy was completed in 1988 and included removal of an additional 1,163 cubic yards of soil and 890 tons of concrete near the mill, placement of clean fill, and regrading and vegetation of the site. The 1993 Five Year Review recommended no additional action. The 2001 Five Year Review indicated the site “is not a significant human health risk because cleanup levels in the 1985 ROD were established for residential areas assuming lifetime exposure and are believed to be conservative for the site”. In 2003 the site was delisted from the National Priorities List.
What Is the Current Site Status?
In 2016, the discovery of additional mine tailings along the bank of the Trinity River prompted a new investigation to determine whether the contamination at the site presents a threat to human health and environment. EPA is currently investigating potential threats to human health and the environment by sampling soil, surface water, and sediment at the site. From 2017 to present EPA has collected over 400 soil samples from the gravel bar, former mill area and adjacent pasture at depths up to 40 feet to better define the nature and extent of contamination. A Human health assessment has been completed for the site to better characterize potential risks. An ecological risk is being prepared.
