PACIFIC COAST PIPELINEFILLMORE, CA
  Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Pacific Coast Pipe Line Superfund Site is a 55-acre property at 67 East Telegraph Road, just north of State Highway 126 and east of Pole Creek in Fillmore, California. From 1928 to 1950, Texaco operated an oil refinery at the site. Improper disposal practices contaminated soil with lead andpolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and contaminated groundwater with volatile organic compounds (VOCs). The site soil has been cleaned up and the most recent groundwater remedy has been operating since 2015. In 1992, EPA selected pumping and treatment of contaminated groundwater as the long-term remedy. The potentially responsible party (PRP) installed two extraction wells and a soil vapor extraction system. The treatment systems reduced the amount of benzene in groundwater but could not clean the groundwater to drinking water standards. EPA approved the shutdown of the systems in 2002. In 2011 EPA selected a cleanup remedy for contaminated soil and changed the cleanup remedy for groundwater. See the Cleanup Activities section of this website for more details.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Soil: The surface soil cleanup was completed in 2014 and the property is now ready for commercial and recreational use.  It cannot be used for residences or schools.  A land use covenant to restrict the property use was recorded at the Ventura County Recorder's Office on August 19, 2016.  This covenant is binding on current and subsequent property owners and remains in effect until it is formally modified or removed.  EPA will continue to assess the site every five years to determine if the cleanup remedy remains protective of human health and the environment.  The most recent review was conducted in 2016.  All selected cleanup objectives and associated cleanup levels are consistent with EPA policy and guidance.  The surface portion of the site was deleted from the list of Superfund sites on March 22, 2018, because it met all of the completion requirements specified in Close-Out Procedures for National Priorities List Sites. ﻿Groundwater: The 2011 ROD Amendment calls for air sparging in the groundwater.  However, due to the drought there is very little groundwater so EPA has focused on removing benzene and toluene from deep soil (depper than 10 feet) with an SVE system.  The system has removed 38 pounds of benzene and 24 pounds of toluene since it began operating in 2015.  After this system is no longer efficient at removing contamination, EPA will install a bioremediation system or will implement the monitored natural attenuation remedy. The site groundwater is being cleaned up by Chevron with EPA oversight.

What Is the Current Site Status?
Remedy Selected EPA amended the cleanup plan in 2011 to address soil contamination and the remaining groundwater contamination. ﻿The selected remedy for soil included:
﻿excavaton of contaminated soil and disposal in an on-site consolidation area;
﻿a multi-layer cap over the consolidation area in order to prevent direct contact; and
﻿institutional controls to limit property use to commercial and recreational uses
Cleanup Ongoing The surface soil cleanup was completed in 2014 and the property is now ready for commercial and recreational use.  The PRP excavated and disposed of about 42,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil. Ongoing treatment of groundwater and vapor from deep soil (deeper than 10 feet below ground surface) will continue to reduce contamination at the site.
Enforcement Information
Chevron is conducting the groundwater cleanup pursuant to a consent decree.
