MODESTO GROUND WATER CONTAMINATIONMODESTO, CA 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Modesto Ground Water Contamination site is located in Modesto, California, and is a dry cleaning facility with soil and groundwater contaminated with tetrachloroethylene (PCE). Following construction of an interim remedy, operation and maintenance activities and monitoring are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions.  Multiple actions have been taken to manage contamination at the site, and routine site maintenance and monitoring are ongoing. To date, the groundwater treatment system has treated approximately 342 million gallons of water and has removed approximately 720 pounds of PCE. To date, the SVE system has removed approximately 3,500 pounds of VOCs. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Initial Actions Initial actions included installation of a limited soil vapor extraction (SVE) system to address shallow soil contamination. The system shut down after site conditions improved. Remedy Selected In 1997, EPA selected an interim remedy for cleaning up the PCE contamination. This remedy included a groundwater extraction and treatment system and an SVE system. EPA is currently conducting a feasibility study to inform the site’s final remedy. Cleanup Ongoing SInce 2000, the interim groundwater and SVE systems have been operational. In 2008, the SVE system was expanded to increase PCE removal. In 2012, the groundwater remediation system was expanded in with the installation of another extraction well. Installation of 16 groundwater monitoring wells has helped identify the extent of groundwater contamination. Beginning in 2019, the SVE system operated intermittnetly after site conditions improved, but continous operation was restored in 2021 after monitroing indicated contamination remained in the soil. EPA completed the feasibility study in May 2019 and issued the Proposed Plan and Record of Decision (ROD) in 2021. The ROD determined the final remedy to be enhancement of the current Soil Vapor Extraction system while maintaining the current groundwater system. In 2023, the Five-Year Review provided recommendations forimprovements. In 2023, the SVE system was expanded to address the remaining contamination. Additional SVE system enhancements are ongoing. Top of Page