SMELTERTOWN SITESALIDA, CO 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 120-acre Smeltertown site is located near Salida in Chaffee County, Colorado. Many industrial businesses operated on site over the past century, including lead-zinc smelting and wood-treating facilities. Site activities associated with these operations included the dumping of molten slag along the Arkansas River and allowing creosote and other wood-treating chemicals to drip onto the ground. These activities contaminated soil, surface water and groundwater with hazardous chemicals and heavy metals. Following cleanup, operation and maintenance activities are ongoing.
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA divided the site into three separate areas, or operable units (OUs), to better address cleanup. OU1 focuses on the historic lead/zinc smelting operation area and includes an area of waste consolidation. OU2 addresses soil contaminated with wood-treating chemicals. OU3 addresses the area formerly occupied by the Colorado Zinc Company. The site’s long-term remedy for OU1 included consolidating and capping debris, wastes and contaminated soil; implementing site access controls and institutional controls; and groundwater monitoring. The long-term remedy for OU2 included placing near-surface contaminated soil in the waste consolidation area at OU1; implementing site access controls and institutional controls; and groundwater monitoring. OU3 has been cleaned up and closed under Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Corrective Action orders issued by Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, and removed from the site. Remedy construction took place between 2000 and 2004. Maintenance of the waste consolidation cap and groundwater monitoring are ongoing. Site cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. Removal actions between 1993 and 1995 included temporarily providing affected residents with bottled water; providing permanent alternate water supplies to impacted residents by installing new wells and permanent water treatment systems; removing contaminated soil and sludge from residential properties; decontaminating rails stored near a residence; and removing lead- and creosote-contaminated materials from the banks of the Arkansas River. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is being addressed through potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Continued protectiveness of the remedy requires determining how to correctly test for contaminants; evaluating the need for an active remedy to address groundwater contamination; modifying the monitoring plan; and recording remedy and monitoring plan changes in a decision document. Top of Page