Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Bonita Peak Mining District site consists of 48 historic mines or mining-related sources where ongoing releases of metal-laden water and sediments are occurring within the Mineral Creek, Cement Creek and Upper Animas River drainages in San Juan County, Colorado. Historic mining operations have contaminated soil, groundwater and surface water with heavy metals. A remedial investigation to determine the nature and extent of contamination is underway. 
Maps of source area locations 
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
﻿1990s EPA and the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE) conducted a Superfund Site Assessment of the area in the 1990s. This assessment identified the severe impacts to aquatic life in the Upper Animas River and its tributaries from naturally occurring and mining-related heavy metals. It also acknowledged the community-based collaborative effort that was under way at that time to address those impacts. In recognition of the community-based collaborative effort, EPA agreed to postpone listing of a site to the Superfund National Priorities List (NPL), as long as progress was being made to improve the water quality of the Animas River. 2005–2014 Until approximately 2005, water quality in the Animas River was improving. However, since 2005, water quality in the Animas River has not improved, and for at least 20 miles below the confluence with Cement Creek, has declined significantly. In 2008, because of this declining water quality in the Animas River, EPA’s Superfund Site Assessment program began investigations in upper Cement Creek focused on evaluating whether the upper Cement Creek area alone would qualify for inclusion on the NPL. This evaluation indicated that the area would qualify, although after receiving additional community input, EPA again postponed efforts to include the area on the NPL and continued to participate in the community-based collaborative efforts. In support of the collaborative effort, EPA’s Superfund Remedial program contributed resources for water quality sampling, ecological risk assessment and data analysis. In addition, the Superfund Removal program contributed resources for the investigation and closure (bulkheading) of the Red & Bonita Mine tunnel. EPA, through its Ecosystem Protection program, also provides the Colorado Water Quality Control Division of CDPHE with Nonpoint Source Management program (Section 319) grant funds. The Animas River Stakeholders Group (ARSG) and others have received grants under that program, as well as contributing other resources, for investigation and cleanup efforts in the Upper Animas watershed. Sunnyside Gold Corporation (SGC), the U.S. Bureau of Land Management and the State of Colorado also have conducted reclamation activities in the Upper Animas watershed. These efforts have included diverting runoff away from and capping mine waste piles, moving mine waste piles away from drainages, consolidating mine waste piles, placing bulkheads in draining adits and re-vegetating mine waste piles. 2015–2016 Under the Superfund Removal program, an engineered concrete bulkhead was installed in the adit of the Red & Bonita Mine during summer 2015. On August 5, 2015, EPA’s Superfund Removal program was conducting an investigation and assessment of the Gold King Mine to: 
assess the on-going water releases from the mine,
treat mine water, and
assess the feasibility of further mine remediation. 
While investigating the adit, pressurized water began leaking above the mine tunnel, spilling about three million gallons of water stored behind the collapsed material into Cement Creek. Since October 2015, EPA has been treating the discharge from the Gold King Mine at the Interim Water Treatment Plant (IWTP) at Gladstone, Colorado. This event prompted renewed interest in addressing the long-term, mining-related impacts to water quality in the Animas River. On February 29, 2016, EPA received a letter from Colorado Governor John Hickenlooper expressing support for the addition of the BPMD to the NPL. In his letter, he noted that the Town of Silverton, San Juan County, City of Durango, La Plata County, local Tribes and other interested stakeholders requested that the site be added to the NPL. EPA proposed the BPMD for addition to the NPL on April 7, 2016. A 68-day public comment period, during which EPA accepted comments from the public on the NPL proposal, closed on June 13, 2016. After carefully considering and responding to all comments in a responsiveness summary, EPA officially added the BPMD to the NPL on September 9, 2016. In October 2016, the U.S. Forest Service and EPA completed an early action at the Brooklyn Mine in the Mineral Creek Drainage. An existing pipeline that drains mining impacted water from the mine adit to a passive treatment trench was cleaned and repaired. Due to a blockage in the pipe, 15 gallons per minute of drainage had been flowing across the mine tailings and bypassing the passive treatment system. By cleaning out and repairing the pipeline, the flow of drainage across the tailings pile was reduced significantly. Additional work inside the adit is planned for a later date. 2017 The site team, including EPA, U.S. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management and Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment conducted a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) at the site. This includes a Human Health Risk Assessment, Ecological Risk Assessment and a hydrologic study of the Bonita Peak groundwater system. These investigations provide information that will be used in determining cleanup options for the site. 
Remedial Investigation
The portal of the Natalie/Occidental Mine was cleared and a flume was installed.
Monitoring wells were installed at the Howardsville tailings to better understand groundwater movement and contaminant loading in that area.
Sunnyside Gold Corporation conducted investigations of the Mayflower Mill Tailing under an administrative order on consent with EPA.
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment inspected all accessible bulkheads at the site to assess stability.
U.S. Forest Service collected LiDAR data from the site.
Stream gauges were installed throughout the site to help the site team better understand the hydrology of the BPMD.
Ecological Risk Assessment
High- and low-flow sampling of surface water and sediments was conducted.
XRF (X-ray fluorescence) screening was done on select waste rock piles.
Human Health Risk Assessment
Activity-based air monitoring was conducted.
Deer and grouse were harvested for tissue samples.
Plant tissue sampling was conducted.
Bonita Peak groundwater system
Seeps and springs sampling is being conducted to help define the hydrology of the Bonita Peak groundwater system.
Precipitation data was collected.
Groundwater sampling will take place in November.
The Interim Water Treatment Plant (IWTP) at Gladstone continued to treat ongoing acid mine drainage being discharged from the GKM. The GKM was stabilized, and additional actions were taken to reduce the potential of an unplanned discharge from the mine, including installation of a flow control structure, drilling a horizontal well into the historic level 7 adit and construction of an earthen berm. The valve in the bulkhead of the Red & Bonita mine has not yet been closed. EPA continued collecting data and evaluating plans to temporarily close the valve in the engineered concrete bulkhead in the Red & Bonita Mine to determine any impacts to the Bonita Peak groundwater system from incrementally increasing the water level behind the bulkhead. In preparation for a temporary closure of the Red & Bonita bulkhead valve, the following actions were taken: 
A new valve on the Red & Bonita pipeline was installed to direct adit flow away from the waste rock pile and reduce contamination loading from the mine to Cement Creek.
A pressure gauge was installed at the Mogul Mine.
A flume has been installed at the Black Hawk Mine and the adit has been stabilized.
The American Tunnel was cleaned out, the adit stabilized and the bulkhead inspected. Due to safety concerns related to weather late in the 2017 field season, the drilling of the planned monitoring well into the American Tunnel was postponed. 
2018 The site team continued the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) at the site. This includes a Human Health Risk Assessment, Ecological Risk Assessment and a hydrologic study of the Bonita Peak groundwater system. These investigations provide information that will be used in determining cleanup options for the site. 
Remedial Investigation
EPA delineated mining related features associated with source areas identified in the BPMD site.
The state of Colorado began its assessment of all accessible bulkheads at the site to assess stability.
The U.S. Geological Survey and USFS collected LiDAR data, which will provide high resolution topographic information for the mining district.
BLM undertook supplemental site investigation of all source areas it manages. It also conducted operation and maintenance at the Lark, Joe/John and Forest Queen mines.
EPA is investigating the use of instream water monitoring sensors to better understand contamination sources.
Human Health Risk Assessment
Activity-based air monitoring to assess possible human exposure to heavy metals was completed.
A bioavailability study to better understand exposure impacts was conducted.
EPA explored the use of fluidized bed technology as a viable alternative to activity-based air monitoring.
Ecological Risk Assessment
The Biological Technical Advisory Group continued to be engaged in the development of the risk assessment.
High- and low-flow sampling of surface water and sediment was conducted.
Fish population studies were undertaken.
EPA continues oversight of an administrative order on consent with Sunnyside Gold Corporation for the remedial investigation of the Mayflower Mill Tailings.
Terrestrial Risk Assessment
Samples of soil, invertebrates and vegetation were collected. These samples were collected in floodplains, upland areas and the “halos” around source areas.
Bonita Peak groundwater system
Seeps, springs and groundwater were sampled.
Precipitation data were collected.
EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order to Sunnyside Gold Corporation for remedial investigation of the Bonita Peak Groundwater System.
While the site-wide remedial investigation is ongoing, mining-related sources in the BPMD were identified where contaminant migration issues could be addressed through interim remedial actions. EPA issued a proposed plan for these actions on June 14, 2018, for public comment. EPA presented the proposed plan at a public meeting and, by request, extended the comment period from 30 to 60 days. The proposed plan identified a preferred alternative for each of five types of contaminant migration issues and compared it to the “no action” alternative. EPA will issue an Interim Record of Decision after all comments have been considered. EPA continues to treat mine-impacted water from the Gold King Mine at the Interim Water Treatment Plant (IWTP) at Gladstone. EPA established an interim sludge management location at the Kittimac Tailings area. At this location, 14,000 cubic yards of sludge from the IWTP were mixed with 20,000 cubic yards of tailings. A berm was created with the sludge/tailings mixture, which will help prevent trespass activities at the location. In this innovative approach, the sludge will immobilize heavy metals found in the tailings, thereby reducing human health and environmental impacts. EPA will use monitoring wells to ensure there are no negative impacts from the interim sludge management location. EPA continues its efforts to secure a location for a permanent, site-wide waste repository. Throughout the year, the site team engaged in the following community involvement activities: 
﻿Routine meetings with the Silverton/San Juan County Planning Group and local officials in La Plata County and Durango.
A site tour organized by the San Juan Historical Society to discuss identification of cultural resources in the BPMD. The site team is also supporting the San Juan County Historical Society’s ongoing underground mapping project.
A new web-based story map that combines narrative, photos, interactive maps, and analytical data collected at the site. View the story map ».
Anthony Edwards was appointed the Bonita Peak Mining District Communications Liaison. He will share information about the site cleanup and the work of the Silverton/San Juan County Planning Group with the local community as well as foster communications with downstream stakeholders.
In November, year-in-review presentations were made in Silverton, Colo. and Shiprock, N.M. 
﻿2019 
Risk Assessment
EPA completed the Aquatic Baseline Ecological Risk Assessment (BERA) which evaluated how fish and bug populations are impacted by high metals and low pH from source areas.
EPA finalized the Baseline Human Health Risk Assessment (HHRA). This found that no occupational exposures (road workers and ATV tour guides) exceeded levels of concern. During this process, four dispersed camping areas were identified with health concerns which will be addressed under IROD actions or other remedial investigations.
Sampling was completed for the terrestrial BERA and will be finalized in fall 2020.
Remedial Investigation
EPA started the characterization of nature and extent of contamination across the site, to determine how contaminants are transported. This included high flow and low flow surface water sampling.
Surface water and draining mines were sampled monthly.
Groundwater System
A well in the American Tunnel was drilled to assess the conditions between bulkheads. Information gathered from this well will be used to better understand the water levels within the tunnel and the connection with the larger Sunnyside mine pool as well as connections with other mine workings.
EPA finalized the 2016-2018 Seeps, Springs, and Draining Mines Characterization Report.
Interim Record of Decision Actions
﻿The Interim Record of Decision (IROD) was finalized in May 2019 and includes 23 source areas where EPA will conduct cleanup actions. Actions including stabilizing mine source areas and reducing contaminant loading to surface waters were completed at two source areas.
IWTP Sludge Management at Kittmac
EPA completed the sludge management process by stabilizing sludge from the IWTP with Kittimac tailings. Groundwater monitoring wells were installed to monitor the site for the future.
The site was revegetated and fenced in agreement with the property owner.
Innovative Technologies
EPA participated in a variety of innovative technologies. A biocement pilot study was conducted at Kittimac. There is an ongoing centrifuge study at Gladstone treatment plant to reduce water in sludge.
Fiber optic distributed temperature sensors were deployed in stretches of Upper Cement Creek and the West Fork of the Animas River. Results will provide indications of potential stream contributions from surface and subsurface features, such as seeps and springs.
Pilot testing plans for in-situ stabilization began at two waste rock piles.
BLM coordinated with Fort Lewis College on autonomous robotics testing in Gold King Mine to view inside workings.
Throughout the year, the site team engaged in the﻿ following community involvement activities: 
Routine meetings with the Silverton/San Juan County Planning Group and local officials in La Plata County and Durango
At the request of Silverton/San Juan County, EPA created a web-based calendar listing all field activities in the mining district. View the site calendar ».
In cooperation with local emergency response agencies, EPA revised the Animas River Alert and Notification Plan for use at the site. 
﻿2020 
Planning
The site team finalized the Adaptive Management Site Management Plan in November 2020, which provides a framework for decision-making, documentation, planning and prioritizing activities at the site.
Adaptive Management Site Management Plan, November 2020 (pdf) (42 pp, 1.9 MB) 
Risk Assessment
EPA completed the Terrestrial Baseline Ecological Risk Assessment (BERA) which evaluates how terrestrial animals living in the mining district are impacted by mining-related contamination.
Terrestrial Baseline Ecological Risk Assessment (pdf) (726 pp, 34.7 MB) 
Remedial Investigation
The loading tool was updated to include additional metals (Zn, Cd, Mn, Pb, and Al). The loading tool will help prioritize work by identifying loads by reach.
EPA and partners continued gathering data to understand the nature and flow of contamination, including the collection of baseline winter data.
Groundwater System
EPA ran the Red and Bonita Bulkhead Test from July through October 2020 to assess impacts to groundwater levels and water movement. The Interpretive Report sharing the findings from this test are expected to be released by April 2021.
Interim Record of Decision Actions
EPA completed work to reroute mine drainage around the waste rock pile at the Natalie/Occidental Mine.
The team placed a culvert at the Koehler, Junction and Longfellow Mines, and is continuing to remove sediment at the pond.
Sunnyside Gold Company installed 20 additional sampling wells at Mayflower. Results of 2020 sampling activities are expected to be released in Spring 2021.
IWTP Sludge Management at Kittimac
EPA released a proposed plan for a sitewide waste repository. The public comment period ran in July and August 2020. Based on public comment, the remedial approach is to initially use Impoundment 4. The team is currently working on a sitewide repository IROD.
Fact Sheet: Proposed Plan for the Bonita Peak Repository (pdf) (2 pp, 1.2 MB) 
Innovative Technologies
EPA dewatered sludge at Gladstone treatment plant using the Brown Bear sludge tractor with auger.
EPA began pilot testing for in-situ stabilization at the Amy and Aspen Mines.
Throughout the year, the site team engaged in the following community involvement activities: 
Routine meetings with the Silverton/San Juan County Planning Group and local officials in La Plata County and Durango, held virtually due to COVID-19.
EPA released numerous fact sheets and provided in-depth presentations to share more details about ongoing and planned work at the site. These documents are all available in Site Documents & Data > Reports and Documents. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
​The site-wide remedial investigation is ongoing and mining-related sources in the BPMD were identified where contaminant migration issues could be addressed quickly through interim remedial actions. In May 2019, the EPA released the Interim Record of Decision (IROD) documenting remedial actions to be taken at 23 source areas across the district over the next 3-5 years. These actions were  intended to stabilize source areas and reduce contaminant loading from erosion of mine waste into nearby streams.  
​Fact Sheet: Interim Record of Decision for the Bonita Peak Mining District Superfund Site, May 2019 (pdf) (2 pp, 842 K)  
​In 2024, EPA conducted the first Five-Year Review of the 2019 IROD. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The 2024 Five-Year Review (pdf)(91 pp, 66.14 MB), concluded that the remedy will be protective of human health and the environment once all cleanup actions are complete.  EPA expects 2019 IROD cleanup actions will be complete in 2025. The next five-year review of the 2019 IROD is scheduled for Fall of 2029.  
Fact Sheet: Interim Record of Decision for the Bonita Peak Mining District 