Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
​​While Pueblo has a long industrial past, the Superfund site focuses on the impact from one historic smelter. Pueblo was once home to five ore smelters and is still home to one active steel mill, which is not a part of the Superfund site. The historic Colorado Smelter was a silver and lead smelter that operated in the Eilers and Bessemer neighborhoods from 1883 to 1908. The Colorado Smelter historical footprint is bound by Santa Fe Avenue to the east, Mesa Avenue to the south, Interstate 25 to the west, and the Arkansas River to the north. The Bessemer, Eilers, and Grove neighborhoods are adjacent to the former Colorado Smelter site. Some slag (waste) from the facility was used as track ballast for the D&RG track constructed between Florence and Cañon City. In 1923, bricks from the blast furnace smokestack were used to construct St. Mary School.   ​An employee found high levels of metals during an inspection at the Santa Fe Bridge Culvert. This led to a series of investigations in the early 1990s. In 2010, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE) tested homes in the area. This study found elevated lead and arsenic levels in smelter slag and neighborhood soils. These metals pose a threat to current and future residents.  EPA listed the site on the National Priorities List in December 2014. EPA then divided the site into two operable units (OUs), OU1 (Community Properties) and OU2 (Former Smelter Area).    ​From 2015 to the present day, EPA has been sampling homes in the area. Since 2016 and 2018, EPA tested and cleaned the soil and indoor dust at many homes in the area. EPA finished cleaning soil at homes under the current cleanup level in 2023. Sampling on the former smelter and surrounding areas will help EPA decide how to address contamination.   ​In July 2018, based on risk to residents in the study area, EPA requested increased funding for residential cleanup. Beginning in 2022, Colorado Smelter received up to $15 million annually for cleaning homes. That’s more than double the amount originally budgeted. As a result, EPA expects to finish cleaning homes four to six years faster. Approximately 850 homes qualify for cleanup.  ​There are approximately 2,030 homes and between 100-200 commercial properties in the study area. The study area covers an approximately half a mile from the former smelter’s tallest smokestack. Most homes are single-family detached homes, many with bare-soil yards. Ninety-five percent of the homes are pre-1978 (before the lead paint ban), so lead-based paint hazards may also be present. Since 2015, the Pueblo Health Department has helped identify and address lead-based paint hazards. They also test residents for lead exposure for free. ​  Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Operable Unit 1 – Community Properties ​Operable Unit 1 includes both homes and businesses. EPA has prioritized cleaning up residential properties in OU1, which is described in further detail in this section.   ​During the Remedial Investigation, EPA gathers data. This data determines what the contamination is, where it is, and how it may affect people, animals and the environment. Then, the EPA tests which technologies would be the best at treating contamination both short term and long term. EPA began testing homes 2015. EPA tests both the soil and interior dust for metals. EPA finished testing and cleaning soil and indoor dust at homes under the current cleanup goal.  Commercial soil sampling began in June 2023.    ​In early September 2021, EPA extended the study area boundary. EPA added ~100 more homes to OU1 in areas next to homes with high lead or arsenic. In September 2022, EPA extended the study area boundary to include 66 more homes. You can see maps of the study area under Maps.  In 2017, EPA and the state health department signed the cleanup (or remedial) plan for homes. This document is called the Interim Record of Decision (IROD). The plan states EPA will remove and replace contaminated soils. EPA will remove the soil down to either 18 inches for yards or 24 inches for gardens or areas where children play. EPA will also perform indoor dust cleanups where necessary.  ​EPA samples residential properties and compares them to the site-specific cleanup levels listed below. The cleanup levels are measured in parts per million (ppm):  
​Arsenic in soil – 61 ppm 
​Lead in soil – 350 ppm 
​Arsenic in indoor dust – 61 ppm 
​Lead in indoor dust – 275 ppm  
​The site-specific risk-based cleanup levels are considered protective of human health. The lead levels are based on EPA’s lead policy (1998), the Integrated Exposure Uptake Biokinetic (IEUBK) model, and other site-specific information which predicts the level of lead in a child’s blood in specific environments. The site-specific cleanup level takes into consideration the most sensitive populations and ensures they are protected. Early Interim Action Residential Property Cleanups, Operable Unit 1 – Community Properties, Record of Decision, September 2017 (pdf) (150 pp, 7.6 MB, About PDF) I﻿n January 2023, EPA completed its First Five-Year Review (pdf) (47 pp, 14 MB). This review evaluates if the chosen remedy remains protective of human health and the environment. The review focused on the residential cleanup in Operable Unit 1 (OU1) defined in the 2017 Early Action Interim Record of Decision (ROD).   ​The review determined that the OU1 residential remedy will be protective when EPA finishes cleaning soil and indoor dust at homes. Institutional controls will be needed for properties where contaminated soil is left in place at high levels. EPA will request community feedback on the selected institutional controls before the final OU1 ROD. The next Five-Year Review is due by January 2028.  ​In June 2023, EPA added long term protectiveness to the residential remedy. The remedy was modified to add controls to ensure the cleanup remains protective in the long term. This modification finalized the Site boundary and is the first step to add restrictions for digging large amounts of soil in residential areas of the Superfund site. This change is called an Explanation of Significant Differences, or ESD.  
Explanation of Significant Differences (pdf) (9﻿ pp, 1.2MB) 
Operable Unit 2 - The Former Smelter Area ​Operable Unit 2 (OU2) is the portion of the Site where the former smelter was located. It includes commercial and industrial properties, vacant land, parks and several undeveloped areas outside of the smelter footprint. The footprint of the former smelter is approximately 49.7 acres. Approximately 16 of those acres contain large deposits of slag.  ​Since 2015, EPA has conducted sampling at Operable Unit 2. From 2018 to 2019, EPA conducted one year of quarterly air monitoring to investigate whether wind-blown contaminants were being carried from OU2 onto nearby residential properties. The report showed that this was not the case. The report and a presentation interpreting its results may be found below.  
TSP and Metals Air Concentration Summary (pdf) (88 pp, 8.1 MB, About PDF)
Summary and Review of TSP and Metals Air Concentration Summary (pdf) (14 pp, 1.3 MB)
Presentation and Review of the Total Suspended Particulate and Metals Air Concentration Summary (pdf) (31 pp, 6.9 MB) 
​EPA also began sampling surficial soils in the former smelter’s footprint in 2019 and completed this effort in 2020. Investigation of the area’s surface water, pore water (water contained in soil, sediment or rock), and sediment began in 2019 and is ongoing. The results of these studies will help inform how groundwater should be investigated. EPA is compiling existing site information to update OU2’s Conceptual Site Model, which is a living framework for understanding what happened at the site and who or what may be exposed to site-related contaminants. This information is also being used to take preliminary steps to develop the Human Health Risk Assessment and the Ecological Risk Assessment, which evaluate how smelter-related contamination may impact people, plants, and animals.  ​EPA anticipates finalizing a Record of Decision for Operable Unit 2 in 2027, although this timeline is subject to change.​  Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Operable Unit 1 – Community Properties Operable Unit 1, community properties, is broken into two sections: residential and commercial. Residential properties are being investigated (remedial investigation and feasibility study) and cleaned up (remedial design and remedial action). Commercial properties are currently being investigated and will be cleaned up after a site-specific cleanup goal is developed.   Status of Residential Properties As of February 2025, EPA finished sampling and cleaning residential properties under the current cleanup goal. EPA finished residential exterior soil sampling and cleanup in March 2024. EPA finished residential interior dust sampling and cleanup in February 2025. EPA sends a letter to property owners after both sampling and cleanup; EPA recommends property owners keep a copy of these letters with their home records. Based on the January 2024, Updated Lead Guidance the EPA is evaluating the risks from lead in soils to sensitive populations. This analysis will include compiling available site data to determine the potential presence and extent of lead-contaminated soils. Lead can pose health risks to sensitive populations, especially children under 7 years old and pregnant or nursing women. The process to implement the Updated Lead Guidance will involve additional planning, data gathering, risk assessment and funding requests. EPA will coordinate with our state partners and request public feedback on our proposed cleanup plans before additional cleanups begin.  While implementing the Updated Lead Guidance may take years to complete, the EPA and the Colorado Department of Public Health and the Environment will share information on planned activities and results as they become available. In the meantime, and out of an abundance of caution, if you live near the Colorado Smelter Superfund Site, the EPA recommends you have your children tested for lead annually; especially those under 7 and if the soil at your property was not replaced previously. Additionally, you can take some simple actions to limit exposure to potential lead contamination in soils, including:  
Maintaining yards and other soil cover;   
Washing hands, especially children’s, after handling soil, playing outside, and before meals;  
Making sure children eat nutritious meals high in iron and calcium;  
Keeping dust levels down by mopping and damp dusting regularly;   
Regularly changing out furnace filters; 
Keeping kids’ toys and play areas clean;  
Taking shoes off at the door and keeping pets clean;  
Wearing gloves while gardening; and  
Cleaning homegrown produce and peeling root vegetables.   
The EPA Colorado Smelter site team will communicate with residents affected by this guidance about the specific next steps the Agency will take in their community. Residents may also contact the site’s Community Involvement Coordinator with questions or concerns at (archer.elizabeth@epa.gov) or (720)-512-1917.  As of January 31, 2025, EPA has completed the following activities:  
Soil sampling has been completed at 1,967 homes (complete - 3% denied access) 
Soil cleanups and restoration has been completed at 813 homes (complete - 5% denied access) 
Indoor dust sampling has been completed at 1,814 homes (89% of study area homes) 
Indoor dust cleanups have been completed at 568 homes (89% of homes needing cleanup)  
Status of Commercial Properties  EPA began sampling commercial properties in June 2023. If you own a commercial property in the study area and are interested in having testing done, please reach out to EPA’s sampling contractor, PWT, at 303-482-6970.  As of January31, 2025, OU1 commercial sampling has progressed as follows:   
38% of properties had the soil sampled. 
7% of properties are being sampled.
43% of properties are capped/inaccessible. 
12% of properties denied sampling access.  
Status of Schools, Parks and City Properties:* Soil tested, cleanup not needed: 
Strack School, tested in 2020. (The school has since closed.)
Bessemer Academy School, tested in 2017.
Runyon Fields, County-owned, tested in 2018.
Moynihan Park, City-owned, tested in 2019.
Bessemer Park, City-owned, tested in 2017.
Stauter Park, City-owned, tested in 2022.
Bessemer School Park, City-owned, tested in 2017.
93 Unpaved Alleys and 2 City Parcels, City-owned, tested in 2019. 
Soil tested, cleanup needed: 
Benedict Park, City-owned, tested in 2017. EPA conducted soil cleanup at a small area below the playground equipment at this park in 2017. This cleanup area was associated with the former smelter’s main flue. 
*Note that the status is based on site-specific cleanup levels in the 2017 IROD where applicable. Operable Unit 2 – The Former Smelter Area At Operable Unit 2 (OU2 – the Former Smelter Area), EPA is in the early stages of data collection. In early 2022, the site received more funding to speed investigations. This funding allowed EPA to accelerate the investigations of OU2 soil, groundwater, biota (fish tissue, small mammals, bugs and vegetation) and slag piles deeper than 2 feet below the ground. This work was funded in September 2022 as a result of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. Work began two years earlier than planned.   Several unhoused camps are in OU2. Preliminary data show lead and arsenic contamination in the soil, water, and slag in the former smelter area. Individuals living in the former smelter area could come into contact with this contamination which may pose a threat to human health. EPA is collaborating with other agencies and organizations working with the unhoused population to communicate the health risks. The best way to avoid health effects from lead and arsenic is to avoid contact with contaminated soil, slag, and water. See thefact sheet on health risks of living in the former smelter area (pdf) (2 pp, 1 MB). Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
​​At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use. They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.  ​For more background, see Institutional Controls.  ​Institutional Controls will be in place when the residential cleanup work Record of Decision (ROD) is finalized. EPA, the state and the city will develop these institutional controls with input from Community Advisory Group representatives. ​  Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Early Sampling ​EPA has detailed standards that sampling plans need to meet before they can be used at Superfund Sites. To select a sampling approach for residential properties, EPA collected soil samples from 12 residential properties within the preliminary study area in 2015 and examined different sampling and analytical methods. The purpose of this sampling was to collect information necessary to ensure an accurate and efficient investigation would take place during the site remedial investigation (RI) and to help inform the OU1 RI Quality Assurance Project Plan (QAPP).   ​The QAPP, along with any amendments, explains the sampling and analytical procedures for the site. This ensures that any EPA team or contractor will use the same methods to collect data to produce good quality results. Under the OU1 RI QAPP, EPA samples indoor dust and outdoor soils for arsenic, lead and other metals. The QAPP may be found here: Quality Assurance Project Plan for OU1 (pdf) (119pp, 3MB). Duct Study ​Along with soil and dust sampling, EPA’s Office of Research and Development (ORD) Superfund and Technology Liaison Research (STLR) evaluated risks from metals in HVAC systems. Community Advisory Group (CAG) members raised concerns that homes could be recontamination by Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) duct work systems after a cleanup. ORD conducted a literature search, lead speciation study, and site-specific duct work pilot study in April and November 2017. Although existing research is limited, ORD summarized several studies showing that cleaning ducts did not significantly lower dust concentrations in the home.   ​The site-specific duct work pilot study collected 148 samples at 7 homes. These included: 27 air samples, 7 vacuum filter dust samples, 20 living area wipe samples, 18 ductwork wipe samples, and 76  samples of dust that built up in the home. While some samples detected lead, the study concluded that air ducts are not a significant source of home contamination. The study also concluded that HVAC systems are not likely to recontaminate homes following indoor cleanups.   ​Further, to limit exposure to metals, ORD recommended these practices to best limit metals exposure in indoor dust:  
​following through with outdoor soil cleanups,  
​limiting dust track-in,  
​using cleaning best practices (damp dusting and mopping) and  
​timely replacement (1-3 months) of HVAC systems filters.   
​For more information, read the Office of Research & Development’s report (pdf) (6pp, 3 MB). Air monitoring study EPA also monitored air quality from 2018 to 2019. The goal of this study was to determine if metals from Operable Unit 2 (OU2) were impacting the surrounding residential area. The air monitor was located on the roof of a local dance studio and tested for total suspended particulates (TSPs) and 22 metals. Results showed low levels of TSP and metal concentrations. This indicates that the remedial investigation on OU2 was not impacting air in the surrounding area. EPA’s Technical Assistance Services for Communities (TASC) contractor also conducted an independent evaluation of the study and came to the same conclusion. You can read their presentation here: TASC Review of Total Suspended Particulate and Metals Air Concentration Presentation (pdf) (31pp, 7MB). ​OU2 Remedial Investigation  Lastly, EPA initiated sampling of surface soils, pore water, sediment, and surface water on Operable Unit 2 (OU2) in 2019. Sampling of OU2 is expected to continue in 2023. For more details, please navigate to the section above “What is the Current Site Status.” Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
​​In 2014, EPA performed a removal action that included putting up no trespassing and caution signs around Operable Unit 2, the Former Smelter Area. EPA created the signs with input from the community and local partners. The signs were designed to raise awareness about metals in OU2 and warn people about the potential health risk from walking or biking through that area. Some of these signs were removed by trespassers and EPA is working with other groups to inform unhoused populations of the risks in this area.  
No-trespassing and caution signs around OU2, the Former Smelter Area In 2016 and 2017, EPA began to address homes with high levels of lead dust inside the homes. EPA completed twenty-seven emergency indoor dust cleanu