Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 34-acre Raymark Industries, Inc. site is located at 75 East Main Street in Stratford, Connecticut.  Raymark Industries, Inc. (Raymark) was a manufacturer of automotive brakes, clutch parts, and other friction components, primarily for the automotive industry.  Raymark and its predecessors were located on a 34-acre parcel at 75 East Main Street in Stratford, CT.  Raymark operated at this location from 1919 until 1989 when operations ceased.  Raymark's manufacturing waste was historically disposed of as fill on the facility, but over time this waste material was also disposed of within Stratford at a minimum of 46 residential properties, and at numerous other commercial, recreational and municipal properties.  In addition, several wetland areas in close proximity to the Housatonic River were also filled in with Raymark's manufacturing waste.  The contaminants in Raymark's  waste primarily consisted of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), asbestos, lead, and copper; however, extensive VOC soil contamination also exists at the former Raymark facility.  Extensive testing of soil, groundwater, soil gas, indoor air, and sediments throughout the Stratford community has been conducted by the EPA and Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (CTDEEP).  The total population within 4 miles of the site is approximately 145,000.  No known public drinking water wells are located within 4 miles of the site; however, a few private water supply wells may exist upgradient of the former East Main Street facility. Seed oysters are cultivated in the Housatonic River near some of Raymark's historical disposal locations and crabs and clams may also be harvested for recreational purposes in the area.  Selby Pond, located adjacent to Ferry Creek and the Housatonic River, has warning signs posted that informs the public that eels from this pond may have high levels of PCBs. The 34-acre former manufacturing facility at 75 East Main Street has been demolished, capped, and redeveloped into what is now known as the Stratford Crossing Shopping Center - which includes Home Depot, Shoprite, and Walmart. The site is being addressed by area or Operable Unit. See What is Being Done for current status of each. Initial Action
Operable Unit 1 - Facility
Operable Unit 2 - Groundwater/Indoor Air (includes vapor mitigation systems)
Operable Unit 3 - Ferry Creek (Area I - Includes Upper Ferry Creek and Associated Wetlands
Operable Unit 4 - Raybestos Memorial Field (Ballpark)
Opearble Unit 5 - Shore Road
Opearble Unit 6 - Additional Properties
Operable Unit 7 – Ferry Creek (Area II - Includes Lower Ferry Creek, Selby Pond, and the Housatonic River Wetlands)
Operable Unit 8 – Ferry Creek (Area III - Includes Wetlands at Beacon Point and Elm Street)
Operable Unit 9 - Short Beach Park & Stratford Landfill Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Initial Action: During the summer of 1992, EPA built a temporary cap on a portion of the commercial property known as the Raybestos Memorial Ballfield.  EPA began excavating contaminated waste/soil from 46 residential properties during the fall of 1993.  This contaminated material was transported back to the Raymark Industries, Inc. facility where it was capped in place (see Operable Unit 1 discussion below).  The residential excavations were completed in the fall of 1995 and property restoration continued into 1996.  In addition, throughout 1993 and 1994, Raymark undertook a number of interim actions at its 75 East Main Street facility, including removing thousands of one cubic yard bags of asbestos and containers holding hazardous substances, temporarily capping four waste lagoons, and securing the facility.  CTDEEP also undertook a number of interim actions on municipal properties between 1993 and 1994, including installing temporary caps and fencing at the Wooster Middle School and a portion of what is known as Short Beach Park.  During 1994, CTDEEP also required several commercial property owners to restrict access to known contaminated waste areas through the installation of fences or pavement.  In June 1995, CTDEEP excavated contaminated materials at the Wooster Middle School and brought all of this material back to the Raymark facility before August 1995 where it was also capped in place.  Between 2003 and 2004, EPA and CTDEEP installed vapor ventilation systems in approximately 106 homes to address the potential intrusion of contaminated vapors into buildings. An additional 14 systems were installed in 2018.  In 2014 and 2015, as part of Federal Aviation Administration safety upgrades at the Sikorsky airport property, EPA contributed a small portion of the funds and provided technical oversight to address an area that included known Raymark Waste.  This property is part of the OU6 Additional Properties. In 2019, EPA initiated the consolidation remedy. EPA excavated contaminated soil and sediment from 30 commercial and open-space OU6 properties, and a significant portion of OU3 Ferry Creek, and transported the contamination to the former OU4 Raybestos Memorial Ballfiled for consolidation and capping. The excavations were completed in 2024 and the capping system will be completed in the fall of 2025. EPA is currently planning to implement additional remedies at the OU6 Morgan Francis and OU5 Shore Road properties. Remedial investigations are ongoing at OUs 7, 8 and 9. Operable Unit 1 - Facility As a result of environmental investigations conducted by Raymark and EPA, a remedy for the manufacturing facility (OU1) was documented in a July 1995 Record of Decision (ROD).  Shortly thereafter, in September 1995, the cleanup of the Raymark property began with the demolition of 15 acres of buildings and the placement of an impermeable cap over those 15 acres as well as over the remaining +/-20 acres of contamination on the property.   Cap construction was completed by EPA (working with CTDEEP and USACE) by November 1997.  The construction of the Stratford Crossing Shopping Center began in the spring of 2001 and opened for retail business in early 2002.  The 1995 ROD also included a source control action for groundwater that included a passive dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) extraction system.  The 2016 ROD for OUs 2, 3, 4, and 6 included a modification of the OU1 remedy to discontinue the DNAPL extraction system because of its limited effectiveness. Reports and Studies for Operable Unit 1 Operable Unit 2 - Groundwater The groundwater study of the area, known as OU2, encompasses approximately 500 acres.  Area groundwater has been classified by the state as non-drinkable, and there are no known active wells within the impacted groundwater aquifer.  Since 2000, EPA sampled the groundwater, soil gas, and indoor air in a residential area between Ferry Boulevard and the Housatonic River for chemicals disposed of at the former Raymark Industries, Inc. facility on East Main Street.  These chemicals, called volatile organic compounds or VOCs, are present in the groundwater and can change from a liquid into a gas, migrate upwards, and then enter homes through the foundation.  EPA identified several homes where this had occurred and, working with CTDEEP, installed sub-slab ventilation systems in nine homes in this area by January 2003. In an effort to ensure protection of public health and also eliminate the continued need for environmental monitoring in this neighborhood, which was both expensive and intrusive, EPA signed a Time-Critical Removal Action Memorandum in 2003 for the installation of sub-slab systems in all of the homes throughout the affected area.  A Health Consultation prepared by CTDPH (working with ATSDR) supported this action based principally on trichloroethene (TCE) exceedances in the area.  The ventilation systems, which are similar to radon systems, draw air from beneath the foundation and vent it through a pipe near the roof of each house. By the fall of 2004, installation of these systems was complete with approximately 100 homes receiving systems (installed by CTDEEP through a cooperative agreement with EPA).  Long-term maintenance of the systems is being conducted by CTDEEP at no cost to the homeowners or tenants.  At the time, a number of property owners in the area refused the systems. In September 2016, EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) that includes the final cleanup remedy for OU2.  The remedy addresses potential vapor intrusion through installation of vapor ventilation systems at approximately 20 properties, mostly residential, and assessing and addressing potential vapor intrusion risks at additional properties. A total of 120 vapor systems have been installed and are maintained by CTDEEP. The existing passive DNAPL extraction system at the former Raymark facility (OU1) will be discontinued because of its limited effectiveness.  EPA will not take further action at the OU1 source area, other than to continue the use and enforcement of an existing environmental land use restriction (ELUR) placed on the OU1 land records prohibiting activities that could compromise the integrity of the cap and also prohibiting borings and the installation of new groundwater wells without the permission of CTDEEP and EPA.  Residential use of the property is also prohibited.  In the downgradient area, EPA will also implement institutional controls to prevent the use of the contaminated groundwater plume that exceeds drinking water standards and the extraction of groundwater that could cause migration of the contaminated plume.  Although public water is currently supplied to those living and working in the downgradient area and the local aquifer has been classified as GB (non-potable without treatment) by the State of Connecticut, institutional controls are needed to address and prevent potential future risk from contaminated groundwater in the OU2 plume, such as from installing drinking and groundwater extraction wells.  Periodic groundwater monitoring will be performed to evaluate potential vapor intrusion, assess any potential changes in the extent of the areas of potential vapor intrusion and in the source and downgradient areas, and take action as needed. EPA will also review the Site at least once every five years to assure that the remedial action continues to protect human health and the environment.   Reports and Studies for Operable Unit 2 Operable Unit 3 – Upper Ferry Creek  Upper Ferry Creek, known as OU3, includes Ferry Creek and the surrounding wetland areas from approximately Interstate 95 (across from Homestead Avenue) southward to Broad Street.  It encompasses approximately 33 acres which includes approximately five acres of wetlands. A remedial investigation report for OU3 was completed in August 1999.  The report concludes that fill and natural soils throughout OU3 are contaminated with asbestos, lead, copper, semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and dioxins.  In some areas the level of contamination is high.  Potential risks to human health, sediment-dwelling organisms, and those that are higher up the food chain (that feed on sediment-dwelling organisms) are a concern throughout the area. In September 2016, EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) that includes the final cleanup remedy for OU3.  From March to October 2023, over 13,000 cubic yards of Raymark Waste soil and sediment containing contaminants of concern from the former Raymark facility were excavated. A majority was consolidated and and is in the process of being capped as part of the OU4 remedy at the former Raybestos Memorial Ballfield. About 10% was shipped to a licensed out-of-town disposal facility.  The top two feet of sediment was excavated from the channel of Upper Ferry Creek from Interstate 95 to the Broad Street bridge; and four feet of soil that meets the definition of Raymark Waste from the banks of Upper Ferry Creek; Restoration included replacement with suitable backfill material and revegetation of excavated areas with native species of trees, shrubs, grass and wetland plants. EPA will implement institutional controls to limit future excavation, groundwater use, and other activities that could pose a risk, where necessary, conduct long-term monitoring and operation and maintenance, and periodically monitor groundwater, surface water, and sediment to assess the effectiveness of the remedy.  EPA will also review the Site at least once every five years to assure that the remedial action continues to protect human health and the environment.   Reports and Studies for Operable Unit 3 Operable Unit 4 - Raybestos Memorial Ballfield The Raybestos Memorial Ballfield (the Ballfield), known as OU4, is located north of the former Raymark facility just over the Metro-North railroad tracks leading to New York City.  It encompasses approximately 14 acres.  Residential properties border the OU4 study area to the north/northwest.  Town, commercial, and industrial properties are located to the northeast.  A former inactive industrial facility (the Contract Plating site) abuts the area to the south/southwest. OU4 was historically used as a gravel pit operation, then as a disposal area for industrial wastes.  Contaminants found include asbestos, lead, arsenic, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). In 1992, EPA installed a security fence around the area, installed a temporary soil cover, and sampled and removed drummed wastes at the Ballfield.  This effort restricted access to the area as well as to the contamination found within the soil. In 1999, EPA performed a comprehensive remedial investigation that included test pits, soil borings, monitoring well installation, an electromagnetic survey, and ground penetrating radar to determine the presence, location, and character of buried wastes.  A remedial investigation report was completed in August 1999.  The report concludes that fill and natural soils throughout the OU4 study area are contaminated with asbestos, lead, barium, zinc, arsenic, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs).  In most cases, the contamination is higher in the subsurface soils than in the surface soils. EPA currently estimates that approximately 111,000 cubic yards of Raymark Waste are present at the Ballfield.  Potential risks are to human health.  No ecological risks were identified. In late 2014, the Town of Stratford received a $2.85 million grant to demolish and remediate the Contract Plating site.  Contract Plating is a Brownfields site, which is outside of the scope of the Superfund site. Vita Nuova, an independent redevelopment consultant, was funded by EPA to work with the Town and assist in the planning and redevelopment of various options for OU4; EPA and CTDEEP coordinated with the Town and Vita Nuova to ensure that OU4 cleanup objectives align with potential redevelopment opportunities.  Vita Nuova also worked with the Town on redevelopment opportunities for the adjacent Contract Plating (Brownfields) site, as well as the adjacent Town Department of Public Works (DPW) site, and in November 2015, presented possible redevelopment plans for the area to the public. In September 2016, EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) that includes the final cleanup remedy for OU4, a remedy that is consistent with EPA’s statutory requirements to select a cleanup plan that protects human health and the environment.  From 2020 to 2024, just over 100,000 cubic yards of Raymark Waste from OUs 3 and 6 have been consolidated at OU4 and are in the process of being capped along with the existing 200,000 cubic yards of Raymark Waste already at the Ballfield.  More specifically, this portion of the cleanup remedy involves the following activities: 
Removal of existing vegetation, buildings, debris, and other infrastructure;
Construction of an access road from Longbrook Avenue through the former Contract Plating property to the Ballfield;
Consolidation of excavated sediment and Raymark Waste from OU3 and OU6 with the existing 200,000 cubic yards of Raymark Waste on OU4;
Construction of a permanent, 7.5-acre low-permeability capping system over the consolidation area to isolate contamination.  The capping system will be able to support redevelopment for commercial/industrial, municipal, and/or recreational uses.  ;
Construction of storm water management features;
Construction of permanent and temporary (based upon input received from residents) visual and sound barriers along the boundary with residents on Patterson Avenue, Clinton Avenue, and Cottage Place;
Restoration of the property with vegetation and pavement as appropriate; 
Institutional controls to protect the cap, limit groundwater use, and other activities that could pose a risk; and
Long-term monitoring and operation and maintenance. 
EPA will also review the Site at least once every five years to assure that the remedial action continues to protect human health and the environment.   EPA’s cleanup plan will allow for the redevelopment of the currently unused and blighted Raybestos Memorial Ballfield and will address many commercial properties whose reuse has been hampered by the presence of Raymark Waste.  This cleanup plan will respond to environmental hazards and allow properties to be used to their full potential, bringing economic benefits to the Town of Stratford. EPA is committed to a cleanup that places primary importance on health and safety for abutting and nearby residents, for residents along any trucking route, and for the workers performing the cleanup work.  EPA will develop the details regarding construction management and health and safety in plans created for each work area during the remedial design process.  Through an enhanced outreach effort, EPA will continue to solicit input from the Stratford community as we develop these plans. Reports and Studies for Operable Unit 4 Operable Unit 5 - Shore Road The Shore Road Area, known as OU5, is an approximately four-acre section of Shore Road near the Housatonic Boat Club and the former Shakespeare Theater that borders the Housatonic River. Contamination was found in this area in 1993 and, as a temporary measure, CTDEEP covered the area with a plastic fabric barrier and six inches of wood chips.  In early 1999, EPA found that the plastic fabric barrier was beginning to wear and that much of the wood chips had eroded.  At the request of the Town of Stratford, EPA took steps to re-evaluate the risks posed by the contaminants in the area.  These steps included the completion of an Engineering Evaluation/Cost Analysis (EE/CA) report in June 1999 that documented risks to human health and the environment from asbestos and lead.  As a result of these findings, EPA released an Action Memorandum in September 1999 and performed a removal action that included the installation of a revetment along the unprotected southeastern tidal areas, restoration of existing riverside revetments to limit exposure to underlying contaminated soils, capping of excavated soils, paving of driven surfaces and capped soils, and installation/restoration of utilities to allow maintenance without the threat of exposure to contaminated soils.  These removal actions were completed in September 2000. EPA issued a Reocrd of Decision (ROD) in March of 2024 which includes the excavation and off-site disposal of approximately 9,500 cubic yards of Raymark Waste. The remedial design is anticipated to be complete in early 2025 with mobilization later in the year. Reports and Studies Operable Unit 5 Operable Unit 6 - Additional Properties The ﻿Additional Properties operable unit, known as OU6, consists of 30 properties located throughout the Town of Stratford.  These pro