SOLVENTS RECOVERY SERVICE OF NEW ENGLANDSOUTHINGTON, CT 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Solvents Recovery Service of New England site is located in Southington, Connecticut. Solvents Recovery Service operated a hazardous waste treatment and storage facility and received waste industrial solvents on site. Sludge were disposed of in two unlined lagoons from 1957 to 1967, when lagoons were drained and covered with fill. After the lagoons closed, wastes were burned in an open pit on site or disposed of off-site. In the 1970s, the state ordered the end of incineration activities. The site encompasses a 4-acre area, which is now fenced, and a groundwater plume. The facility, located on 42 acres, operated as a permitted hazardous waste treatment and storage facility. It received various waste industrial solvents that were distilled and returned to the customer, or blended and used as fuel. From 1957 to 1967, sludge materials were disposed of in two unlined lagoons. In 1967, sludge disposal stopped and lagoons were drained and covered with fill. After the lagoons were closed, wastes were burned in an open pit on site or disposed of off-site. In the 1970s, the state ordered that incineration stop. Past operating practices, spills, and poor housekeeping caused contamination. In 1991, all activities at the site stopped in preparation for closure. Two town wells – #4 about 2,000 feet to the south and #6, about 1,300 feet to the south – were closed in 1979 because of contamination. Land uses near the site include commercial, light industrial, residential and agricultural uses. The facility is about 500 feet west of the Quinnipiac River. ﻿ The site was placed on the National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1983. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. The site is being addressed through two long-term remedial phases focusing on cleanup of groundwater and soil. In 1983, EPA settled a lawsuit filed against the company in 1979 using the federal hazardous waste law. Under the settlement, Solvents Recovery Service was required to improve its procedures for handling solvents; construct a groundwater pumping and treatment system to prevent the migration of contaminated groundwater; and install an off-site system to capture contaminated groundwater beyond the facility boundaries. The company installed the on-site groundwater pump-and-treat system in 1985 and began operating it in 1986. The off-site interceptor system was also installed, though this system never became operational because the company was never issued a discharge permit by the State of Connecticut. The company paved the operations area with asphalt, installed berms to contain spills, improved fire protection and suppression measures by extending the public water supply line to the facility and improved general housekeeping measures. Despite these efforts, many deficiencies remained. In 1992, an EPA time-critical removal action addressed potential health threats associated with PCB contamination in soil and sediment along a drainage ditch on the eastern edge of the operations area. About 19 drums containing contaminated material were removed. In 1994, EPA conducted an investigation into the sources and nature and extent of contamination at the site. Subsequent information indicated that the investigation was not complete, and site PRPs completed the investigation under EPA oversight. In 1995, the site’s PRPs – companies who sent solvents to the site for processing – under EPA oversight installed a slurry wall and an updated groundwater pump-and-treat system that consisted of ultraviolet/oxidation to clean up shallow groundwater and prevent it from migrating. In 1997, EPA ordered site PRPs to expand the groundwater containment system to address bedrock contamination. Groundwater containment and on-site treatment systems were incorporated into the final cleanup plan agreed on for the site in September 2005. EPA selected the final remedy for the site, including soil, in September 2005. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy included treating waste oils and solvents in an aquifer beneath the operations area by heating them in place; consolidating and capping contaminated and wetland soil; capturing and treating on-site contaminated groundwater exceeding federal drinking water standards; monitoring natural degradation of the plume until groundwater cleanup levels are achieved; monitoring natural degradation of the waste oils and solvents in the bedrock aquifer; putting in place restrictions on uses of the property and groundwater and monitoring groundwater; and maintaining the cap over the long term. Preparation of the site for thermal treatment required significant work, including installing infrastructure (gas, sewer, power); rerouting a major telecommunications line; and removing and replacing a leaky concrete culvert that runs across the site to the Quinnipiac River. More than 1,400 heaters, vapor recovery and monitoring wells were installed. Thermal treatment was conducted over 2014-2015.  The cap was constructed in summer 2017. All construction required in the 2005 ROD is complete.  The groundwater pump and treat is ongoing and will be for many years to come.  Since August 2018, groundwater treatment has moved from on site to off-site at the Town of Southington Waste Pollution Control Facility.  The installation of solar panels on the cap in September 2018 will provide the energy needed for future operation and maintenance at the Site.  An additional benefit to the community is the construction of new section of the Farmington Canal Heritage Trail, a regional “rails-to-trails” greenway which covers approximately 84 miles from New Haven, CT to Northampton, MA. Top of Page