GALLUP'S QUARRYPLAINFIELD, CT 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
Gallup's Quarry is a 29-acre abandoned gravel pit in Plainfield, Connecticut. In the 1970s, the owner accepted chemical wastes without a permit. Drums and free liquids were dumped at the site, including wastes containing volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semi-VOCs, PCBs, and heavy metals. Sampling detected contaminants in on-site groundwater, soil, and surface water/sediments. Long-term environmental monitoring is ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state, and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. EPA has done several Five-Year Reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are by the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Changes in federal and state cleanup standards required a change in the remedy so it included groundwater sampling for 1,4-dioxane and arsenic in 2012. There is no current use of, or exposure to, site media containing contaminants over the applicable state and federal standards identified for the site. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA has completed five Five-year Reviews for the site and has determined that the cleanup is protective of human health and the environment. Changes in federal and state cleanup standards required a change in the plant to include groundwater sampling for 1,4-dioxane and arsenic to be monitored in 2012. While it was determined that 1,4-dioxane does not require further sampling and analysis in the short term, arsenic continues to be monitored.  There is no current use of, or exposure to, site media containing contaminants in excess of the applicable State and Federal standards identified for the site. PFAS compounds were sampled during the November 2020 sampling event. All detections of PFOA were below the EPA RSL of 6 ng/L. There was one detection of PFOS slightly above the EPA RSL of 4 ng/L, with a concentration of 4.1 ng/L in GW122S. All detections of PFNA were below the EPA RSL of 6 ng/L and all detections of PFHxS were below the EPA RSL of 40 ng/L. All detections of PFBS were below the EPA RSL of 600 ng/L. Even though PFOS was detected slightly above the EPA RSL, there is no use of Site-impacted groundwater due to ICs in place. Therefore, it’s determined to have no impact on remedy protectiveness. While it is not recommended at this time that PFAS compounds be formally added to the Long-Term Monitoring Plan (LTMP), PFAS should be included for sampling and analysis and a risk evaluation be performed if any new regulations or changes in toxicity values occur.
The next annual groundwater sampling event is expected to be performed in November 2022.
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict the use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used appropriately and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The matrix below is a general summary of the restrictions at this site at the date of this report. The information in this matrix is a general description of the restrictions at the site only. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site. 
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment, and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above. Note that where multiple entries occur, it will impact more than one pathway.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits, and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left on site and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remain onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this website, there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on the use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems, and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of documents above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Annual monitoring of groundwater and surface water is being performed to monitor the progress of the long-term remedial action at the site.
Top of Page