LAUREL PARK, INC.NAUGATUCK BOROUGH, CT 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Laurel Park, Inc. site is located in Naugatuck Borough, Connecticut. A landfill, which has been in existence since the late 1940s, occupies about 20 acres of a 35-acre parcel of land. . Several industries disposed of solvents, oils, hydrocarbons, chemical and liquid sludge, chemical solids, tires and rubber products in the landfill. Facility operations led to soil, surface water, and groundwater contamination. The site was places on the National Priorities List in September 1983. 
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state, and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. The site was cleaned in three stages – initial actions and two long-term remedial phases. Cleanup involved fencing part of the site, installing a water line, building a sewer and source control, and groundwater treatment. Initial actions included building a leachate collection system to capture contaminants leaching from the landfill area into the groundwater and elsewhere. A separate sewer line was built to carry leachate from the site to the Naugatuck Water Pollution Control facility for treatment. To control the source of contamination and to treat groundwater, EPA chose a plan that included putting a synthetic cap over waste disposal areas. The plan also involved a leachate collection system that prevents contact with surface water, as well as a groundwater treatment system to reduce contaminant concentrations in the aquifer. A new water supply line was installed to service affected homes. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy, completed in November 1997, includes a landfill cap, leachate collection and a series of extraction wells. The leachate collection system, which was upgraded in 1998, continues to run. Long-term groundwater monitoring is ongoing. Now that construction has been completed, the site’s PRPs, with supervision from EPA and the Connecticut Department Energy of Environmental Protection, are responsible for operating and maintaining the remedy. This includes ongoing sampling and analysis of air, groundwater and surface water. Reviews are conducted every five years. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional Controls are required for this site. This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of document, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page