NUTMEG VALLEY ROADWOLCOTT, CT
  Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Nutmeg Valley Road site is located in Wolcott, Connecticut. The 3-acre area is the location of an industrial park, with several metalworking and metal-finishing shops in the vicinity. Following short-term removal actions during the 1990s and subsequent investigations to determine the nature and extent of contamination, EPA found no further action was necessary. EPA’s final 2004 cleanup plan for the site included groundwater use restrictions and institutional controls. EPA deleted the site from the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 2005.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal and state actions. Initial actions provided safe drinking water to affected residents and reduced contamination levels in the industrial water supply, limiting the threat of exposure during an investigation to determine the nature and extent of contamination. Electroplating sludge and wastes were removed from two unlined lagoons on Tosun Road. No further cleanup was considered necessary at the site.
In 1992, EPA did an emergency removal at the PAR Finishing facility on Tosun Road. About 1,150 tons of sludge waste and contaminated soil were removed from two unlined lagoons and shipped to a disposal facility in Michigan. This action addressed the threats posed by electroplating wastes in surface soils and removed a potential point source of groundwater contamination. Based on the results of the ecological and human-health risk assessments, EPA narrowed the focus of future investigations to an area roughly the shape of a triangle and bounded by Wolcott Road, Old Tannery Brook and an unnamed tributary. In the spring of 2004, the Town of Wolcott adopted an ordinance restricting all uses of groundwater on site and requiring that all existing groundwater wells be abandoned. In a letter dated July 12, 2005, Mayor Thomas G. Dunn certified that affected property owners had abandoned their wells and connected to the public water supply.﻿
What Is the Current Site Status?
Risk assessments showed that there is the potential for non-carcinogenic effects from the future use of groundwater for drinking water purposes. EPA determined that the Town of Wolcott’s 2004 groundwater ordinance, along with state health code restricting landowners from receiving permits for new drinking water wells, sufficiently prevents human exposure to contaminated groundwater. In September 2004, EPA determined that no further cleanup was needed.After cleanup actions, EPA took the site off the NPL in 2005.

Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
