NEW CASTLE SPILLNEW CASTLE, DE 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The New Castle Spill Site, located in New Castle County, Delaware, is a six-acre site added to the Superfund program's National Priorities List (NPL) on September 3, 1983. The site was used for many years by the Witco Chemical Company (Witco) to process materials used in the production of plastic foam. Witco stored drums containing pre-polymer feedstocks and spent solvents on the southern boundary of the property adjacent to the New Castle Board of Water and Light (NCBW&L) property. In 1977, employees of NCBW&L noticed dead grass near the drum storage area, apparently the result of chemical spills on the Witco property. DNREC then directed NCBW&L to pump the shallow contaminated aquifer and to discharge the water to the nearby wetlands. TRIS, tris-chloropropyl phosphate, a flame retardant that can be related back to Witco's activities, was detected in soils near the drum storage area and in the shallow groundwater beneath the site. VOCs, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), creosote, and phthalates from plastics production were also found in onsite soils. The shallow aquifer used by NCBW&L to provide a public water supply was taken out of service in 1978. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site’s long-term remedy included quarterly monitoring of the shallow groundwater for natural attenuation, annual monitoring of the deeper groundwater aquifer, annual monitoring of surface water and sediments in the adjacent wetlands, and restrictions that prevented people from installing wells in the vicinity of the site. In 1996, EPA determined that the data showed that contaminant levels in the shallow aquifer had reached established safe levels by natural attenuation and cleanup was complete. The Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC) established the institutional controls required by the selected remedy by restricting the installation of wells in the shallow aquifer within a half-mile of the site. After cleanup finished, DNREC removed the groundwater restriction. Following cleanup, EPA deleted the site from the Superfund program's National Priorites List in June 1996. Five-year reviews are not conducted for the site. The level of contaminants remaining at the site allow for unrestricted site use. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
After an investigation of the extent of contamination, the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC), with EPA concurrence, determined that no one in the area was using the shallow aquifer for a drinking water supply, so it was appropriate to allow the contaminant, tris-chloropropyl phosphate (TRIS) to reduce in concentration through natural attenuation (exposure to the effects of time, weather and natural biological processes). Soil contamination was determined not to pose a significant threat to human health or to the environment. After deletion from the National Priorities List (NPL), site ownership was transferred to the City of New Castle. The City has since renovated the historic trolley barn located on the site. The trolley barn is now the home of the New Castle Public Works Department. The area surrounding the site is industrial and residential. Approximately 5,500 people live within three miles of the site. Top of Page