Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Standard Chlorine of Delaware, Inc. site (also known as Metachem) is three miles northwest of Delaware City. It is approximately 65 acres in size and is west of River Road (Route 9) near the south bank of Red Lion Creek. Standard Chlorine of Delaware manufactured chlorinated benzene compounds from 1966 to 2002. In 1981, a chlorobenzene chemical spill occurred at the site while workers were filling a railroad tanker car. In 1986, another spill of 569,000 gallons of various volatile organic compounds (VOCs) spilled onto the plant property and adjacent wetlands. Chlorobenzenes from the spills have been found in groundwater, soil, creek sediments, surface water and nearby wetlands. The site was added on the Superfund program's National Priorities List (NPL) in 1987. Standard Chlorine sold the plant to Metachem Products, L.L.C. in 1998, but in 2002 Metachem abruptly closed and abandoned the plant and declared bankruptcy. Since 2002, EPA and the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC) have maintained custody and control of the site.  Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 2002, the site’s owner declared bankruptcy and abruptly closed the facility, leaving approximately 40 million pounds of chlorobenzenes and related chemicals in deteriorating tanks, pipelines, process vessels and treatment systems. EPA has taken responsibility for the site cleanup since there is no longer a viable potentially responsible party. The Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC) has provided a 10 percent cost share for cleanup actions to date, and will provide long-term monitoring oversight. To address the most hazardous materials, EPA and DNREC removed millions of pounds of abandoned chemicals from the site and decontaminated facility process equipment. These cleanup activities were performed under EPA’s Removal Program between 2002-2006. Groundwater (Interim Remedy under OU-1, Final Remedy under OU-4) 
Since 2007, the EPA has been operating an Interim Groundwater Remedy to treat contaminated groundwater at the site. This interim remedy was enhanced in 2010 through the use of $1.15 million in federal stimulus funds made available through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
The Interim Groundwater Remedy includes a subsurface (underground) barrier wall around the site and a pump and treat system that pumps the contaminated groundwater out from within the wall and treats it to remove the contaminants. The treated water, which meets state standards, is discharged to the surface and flows into Red Lion Creek.
In April 2015, EPA repaired a 900-foot section of the barrier wall that showed signs of groundwater infiltration. Non-contaminated groundwater was entering from outside the contaminated groundwater plume, adding more water to the volume of contaminated water needing treatment. The repair work was completed in May 2015. This barrier wall has been highly effective in containing the contaminated groundwater inside of it, which is enabling a more effective and efficient treatment process.
Beginning in 2025, DNREC is expected to take over the operation and maintenance of the extraction wells, treatment system, and subsurface barrier wall installed for the Interim Groundwater Remedy. Passing the ownership and control of the system to the State will ensure long-term sustainability and local oversight over the project.  
The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) worked with EPA to study the groundwater underlying the site and regional area. See more at USGS's webpage. This study was separate from the ongoing groundwater monitoring.
EPA conducted a targeted Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) to better understand the groundwater contamination at the site. A Proposed Remedial Action Plan (PRAP) was made available for public comment in 2023 and a public meeting was held in August 2023 to solicit public input on a proposed final groundwater remedy for the site. On May 21st, 2024, EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) selecting the Final Remedy for contaminated site groundwater. The selected remedy includes a subsurface barrier wall, a treatment system to pump and treat contaminated groundwater, and institutional controls to prevent the consumption of contaminated groundwater. The selected remedy also includes a Technical Impracticability Waiver for specific areas of the site where it is not feasible to remediate groundwater to cleanup standards. Outside of those areas, groundwater will be restored to federal drinking water standards.
EPA is in the process of procuring a contractor to design the final groundwater cleanup. 
Structures, Waste, and Plant Area Soils (OU-3) 
By 2006, EPA’s Removal Program had dismantled the majority of the facility’s buildings, structures, tanks and equipment and recycled or disposed of them properly. The last remaining distillation columns were dismantled for recycling in spring 2007. Viable chemicals were returned to the "stream of commerce" and waste chemicals were disposed of properly.
The removal of abandoned chemicals, stored in totes inside the warehouse, was completed in 2009, almost three years ahead of schedule, through the use of $1.52 million funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
In 2010, as described in the OU-3 Record of Decision (ROD) (PDF) document, EPA’s Remedial Program selected capping as the remedy for the soils in the former plant area. The Remedial Design (PDF) was completed in June 2012. The design specified a multi-layer geotextile and soil cap in the former plant area, along with a soil gas collection and treatment system and a vegetated cover.
In 2012, EPA completed dismantling the warehouse in preparation for the remedy’s cap. EPA salvaged much of the steel building and recycled over 550,000 pounds of steel. Money generated from salvaging the steel was used to help offset a portion of the costs for the project.
In May 2015, construction of the cap began. EPA issued a ROD amendment (PDF) in February 2016 that specified placement of the OU-2 waste pile soils within the OU-3 multilayer cap that is currently being constructed.
Cap construction activities were completed in Spring 2017. Topsoil was seeded with a native mix of vegetation to stabilize the soil and provide erosion control, sequester carbon, provide habitat for a wide range of birds and other wildlife, and have lower maintenance costs than traditional non-native turf grass. 
DNREC has successfully and permanently taken over the long-term operation and maintenance of the cap and underlying gas collection/treatment system, ensuring local control and oversight over the project. 
Soil and Sediments (OU-2) OU-2 addresses contaminated soils and sediment outside of the former Facility area, including the western drainage gulley, wetland area, Red Lion Creek, and the former waste piles. EPA took over the cleanup in 2002, after Metachem declared bankruptcy. By 2004, the agency discovered that the volume of soil and sediments needing cleanup was four times the original estimate in the ROD. EPA determined that the cleanup method for contaminated soils and sediments selected in the 1995 ROD (PDF), bioremediation (using bacteria to break down the contaminants), did not appear feasible at that time for the most highly contaminated sediment and the contingent remedy described in the 1995 ROD would likely need to be implemented. The contingent remedy is low temperature thermal desorption. There have been three amendments to the ROD for OU-2 since 1995. The most recent amendment, published September 2nd, 2022, explains the cleanup that will take place. The OU2 cleanup is currently in the design phase. Once the design is complete, the cleanup can begin, currently scheduled to start in 2026. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by Site decision documents. The most recent 2021 Five-Year Review (PDF) for Operable Unit 1 (OU-1) and Operable Unit 3 (OU-3, concluded that the remedies for the soils and sediments will be protective of human health and the environment upon their completion, and exposure pathways are currently being controlled. The next five-year review is scheduled for 2026.  A fish consumption advisory is in effect for the Red Lion Creek for PCBs and dioxin. Next steps at the site include addressing soils and sediments contaminated by historic spills outside of the former plant area, including the wetlands, and a long term remedy for contaminated groundwater. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
 At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use. They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup. For more background, see Institutional Controls. Institutional controls are in placed to restrict future land use to commercial, light industrial or parkland purposes. Any future onsite construction must not interfere with the integrity of the cleanup remedies in place. A Groundwater Management Zone implemented and enforced by DNREC is also in place to prohibit the consumption of contaminated groundwater in the vicinity of the Site. 
A Groundwater Management Zone (GMZ) is also in place to prohibit the consumption of contaminated groundwater in the vicinity of the Site.
Additional information about the institutional controls are available in the 2021 Five-Year Review (PDF) (pages 10-11.)
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Standard Chlorine of Delaware (aka Metachem) Site EPA Removal Program.
Top of Page