KOPPERS CO., INC. (NEWPORT PLANT)NEWPORT, DE 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 300-acre Koppers Co., Inc. (Newport Plant) is located in Newport, Delaware. Between 1929 and 1971, site owners operated a wood-treating facility. The site consists of 163 acres of upland areas, 136 acres of wetlands, and three ponds. Facility operations, spills, leaks, and waste management practices contaminated soil, sediment, surface water and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. The site was added to the Superfund program's National Priorities List in August 1990. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Between 1929 and 1971, site owners operated a wood-treating facility. The primary material used in the wood-treatment processes was a creosote/coal tar solution, which was used to preserve railroad ties, telephone poles, and other wood products. Koppers Company acquired the Site in 1940 and reorganized in 1944 into Koppers Company, Inc. (Koppers). Koppers then continued wood-treatment operations at the Site until 1971, when the property was sold to DuPont. In 1991, Beazer East (the successor corporation to Koppers and current land owner) and DuPont (the land owner at that time) signed an agreement with EPA to conduct the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS). Data was collected from surface soil, sediment, groundwater, surface water, air, tissue and other media from the site and surrounding area to inform the RI/FS. The data collected concluded that operations at the site resulted in residual contamination in soil, groundwater, sediments of Hershey Run, and wetlands onsite. The main contaminants are creosote constituents, also referred to as total polycyclic aromatic hyrdocarbons (PAHs). Some areas have high levels of liquid creosote in the groundwater. The liquid creosote is found in a non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL) with a density slightly greater than water. In September 2005, EPA issued the Record of Decision (ROD) (PDF) for the site. The selected remedy included: 
excavating, consolidating and capping all contaminated soils and sediments
constructing a subsurface ground water barrier wall around consolidation area(s) with passive NAPL recovery
restoring ground water through excavation of NAPL contaminated aquifer material outside of consolidation areas
rechanneling Hershey Run
wetlands mitigation
monitoring of groundwater contamination 
In January 2009, EPA was contacted by the Delaware Nation of Oklahoma, a federally-recognized tribal nation with historic lands that include the Koppers Inc. (Newport Plant) Superfund Site. The Nation was concerned about the preservation of historic artifacts and lands found during the investigation. In 2017, ﻿EPA installed six new groundwater monitoring wells to better characterize the effects of site contaminants on groundwater. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
 EPA signed a Record of Decision Amendment (PDF) in August 2022 to address soils, sediments, and dense non-aqueous phase liquids (DNAPL) at the Koppers Co., Inc. Superfund Site. EPA considered all comments received on the 2021 Proposed Remedial Action Plan (PDF) in preparation for the Record of Decision Amendment. A summary of all comments, questions, and EPA responses can be found in the Responsiveness Summary section of the Record of Decision Amendment. 
Top of Page