COKER'S SANITATION SERVICE LANDFILLSCHESWOLD, DE 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Coker's Sanitation Service Landfills site is located in Cheswold, Delaware. The site consists of two landfills that both accepted latex waste sludge from 1969 to 1980. Both landfills were under a permit issued by the Delaware Water and Air Resources Commission, but operators discharged waste into unlined trenches in one of the landfills, eventually causing contamination in the soil and groundwater at the site. The site is also located above two aquifers, the Columbia Aquifer and the Cheswold Aquifer. The Columbia Aquifer is directly under the site and has been affected by the contamination at the site. The Cheswold Aquifer is used for domestic purposes, including for drinking water. EPA added the site to the Superfund program's National Priorities List (NPL) in July 1987. After completing all response actions at the site, EPA deleted the Coker’s Sanitation Service Landfills site from the NPL in August 2011. Following cleanup, operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA began the initial site investigation in 1980 to identify the contaminants of concern in the groundwater and in the landfill leachate. The potentially responsible parties conducted a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study at the site in 1986 to take a closer look at the waste, leachate, groundwater, surface water, soil, sediment, and air for additional areas of contamination. The waste and leachate contained several hazardous chemicals that EPA determined posed a threat to human health or the to the environment. EPA finalized a Record of Decision in September 1990 and selected a remedy that would best address the contamination at the site. The main components of the selected remedy include: 
Restricting land use on the landfill properties
Installing a fence with warning signs around the perimeter of the site to restrict access
Covering the landfill with material to remove potential exposure from the leachate
Leveling out the grade of one of the landfills to improve drainage patterns
Sealing off leachate collection wells
Conducting initial semi-annual (now once every five years) groundwater sampling
Regular landfill inspections
Monitoring Willis Branch surface water for at least five years 
In April 1992, EPA, six potentially responsible parties, and the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control entered into a Consent Decree to begin constructing the main components of the selected remedy. EPA signed the Preliminary Site Close Out Report in September 1993, documenting that the potentially responsible parties completed construction activities at the site. Groundwater, surface water, and sediments were monitored regularly until late 1998 and results consistently showed that the remedy was performing effectively. Monitoring of these areas still occurs at least once every five years. EPA completed a Final Close Out Report (PDF) for the site in February 2009. This report shows all of the work that happened at the site to construct the remedy. The site was officially deleted from the National Priorities List in August 2011. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The Coker's Sanitation Service Landfills site was deleted from the National Priorities List in 2011. EPA continues to conduct five-year reviews of the site remedy because hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants remain in the landfills above levels that would be considered safe for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent, 2024 Five-Year Review (PDF), concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. Potential exposures have been eliminated through covers, fencing, and institutional controls. Monitoring is also conducted periodically to help ensure continued protectiveness. The next five-year review is scheduled for 2029. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in place to prevent direct contact with the buried waste. The State of Delaware developed a groundwater management zone to prevent the construction of wells in the vicinity of the site. Additional information about the institutional controls are available in the 2024 Five-Year Review (PDF) (pages 8-10). Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Cleanup also included a removal action, or short-term cleanup, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. This action took place in 1988 and included the removal and disposal of drums containing latex waste found on site during the remedial investigation. Top of Page