WILDCAT LANDFILLDOVER, DE 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 44-acre Wildcat Landfill Site is located in Dover, Delaware. From 1962 to 1973, a sanitary landfill operated at the site, accepting municipal and industrial waste. The landfill property owners routinely violated state operating permits by scattering metal drums, tires, and municipal trash, dumping wastes into wetlands, and leaving waste uncovered. Site soils, surface water, and groundwater were contaminated with heavy metals, organics, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). EPA added the site to the Superfund program's National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983. Following cleanup, the site was deleted from the NPL in 2003. Monitoring is ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In August 1973, Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC) ordered the landfill facility to cease operations for failing to comply with permit conditions. Exposed landfill wastes were covered with soil. In 1982, an initial investigation of the site found off-site migration of phthalates and heavy metals via groundwater and surface water and contaminated leachate and sediments. Based on this initial investigation, EPA added the site to the Superfund National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983. DNREC began a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) of Operable Unit 1 (OU-1 landfill) in October 1984 and OU-2 (Northwest/Racetrack Pond) in September 1988. As part of the RI/FS, DNREC completed a human health and biological risk assessment, which found that the site posed unacceptable risks to future residents through ingestion of contaminated groundwater and through direct contact with contaminated soil. EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) for OU-1 in June 1988, describing the methods of cleanup for the site. Remedial actions﻿ consisted of the following: 
State-implemented institutional controls to prevent on-site and off-site well installation;
Replacement of two commercial wells;
Additional soil cover and revegetation of exposed landfill wastes, barren areas, and leachate pools or seeps;
Off-site drum disposal;
Signage installation to discourage cap disruption; and
Groundwater monitoring and installation of shallow monitoring wells in groundwater discharge areas. 
EPA issued a ROD for OU-2 in November 1988, which included: 
Draining the Northwest Pond and filling it to create a stable slope and vegetative cover, in accordance with the cover requirements of the leachate seeps;
Construction of a new pond (Racetrack Pond) in an area of the site property unaffected by the landfill to provide surface water and habitat areas;
Construction of a monitoring well up-gradient of Racetrack Pond to ensure it was not affected by the landfill;
Sampling of Racetrack Pond and new monitoring well; and
Restrictions maintaining Racetrack Pond integrity and preventing development on the filled Northwest Pond. 
The site achieved construction completion in September 1992 and a site-wide Preliminary Close Out Report was issued. Remedial actions, delayed due to long-term operation and maintenance responsibility issues, were completed in 1999. Sampling of drinking water wells in 2001 showed no site-related contamination. A Final Close Out Report was issued in 2002. The site was deleted from the NPL in 2003. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent 2022 Five-Year Review concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short-term. In order for the remedy to be protective in the long-term, EPA shall review sampling data at the site and reassess future surface water and groundwater sampling needs moving forward, and ensure that signage is installed notifying the public that it is a former Superfund Site with waste left in place under the landfill covers. The next five-year review is scheduled for 2027. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in place to restrict placement or use of wells on the landfill and adjacent property for any use other than monitoring. Additional information about the institutional controls is available in the 2022 Five-Year Review (pages 10-12).
Top of Page