NEWARK SOUTH GROUND WATER PLUMENEWARK, DE 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Newark South Groundwater Plume Site encompasses an area of southeast Newark along Route 72 between Interstate 95 and Route 4 (East Chestnut Hill Road) in New Castle County. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are found in the city’s municipal well field. VOCs are found in some industrial and commercial products and can cause adverse human health effects. There is ongoing, successful treatment of the City of Newark's public water supply to remove VOCs from the water supply at the city’s South Well Field Treatment Plant. The City of Newark's drinking water continues to meet Federal and State Safe Drinking Water Act standards, as shared annually in its water quality reports. The site was added to the National Priorities List (NPL) in January 2018 and is now eligible for long-term investigation and cleanup as part of EPA's Superfund Program. Further investigations by EPA will work to identify the sources of the VOC contamination found in the groundwater. 
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
November 17, 2016: In collaboration with Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC), a public meeting was held with the community to discuss EPA's groundwater investigation. January - February 2017: EPA began the investigation to better understand the extent of groundwater contamination and to evaluate if the groundwater contamination could be contributing to the spread of organic vapors in nearby homes (a process known as vapor intrusion). EPA conducted the investigation by: 
Installing and sampling 9 new groundwater monitoring wells in the Scottfield and Brookside Park residential developments east of South Chapel Street (Rte. 72); and,
Sampling a monitoring well previously installed by DNREC in the commercial area west of Rte. 72. 
Based on the results of the groundwater sampling, EPA has determined that vapor intrusion is not a concern to residents in the Scottfield and Brookside Park residential developments. September 2017: EPA resampled these same wells to confirm the previous results, assess any possible environmental changes, and evaluate the need for additional investigation, including vapor intrusion testing. The results of the sampling showed that groundwater conditions have not changed, and EPA does not plan to conduct any in-home vapor intrusion testing at this time. More information regarding this sampling effort can be found on the On-Scene Coordinator's Site page. August 2017: The site was proposed to the National Priorities List (NPL). January 2018: The site was added to the NPL, making it eligible for long-term investigation and potential cleanup as part of EPA’s Superfund Program. December 2019 -January 2020: EPA sampled a network of historical groundwater monitoring wells in the area to evaluate current conditions. April - June 2020: EPA conducted a soil and groundwater investigation at commercial properties near the site using a Low-Level Membrane Interface Probe and Hydraulic Profiling Tool (LL MiHPT). The results of these investigations were inconclusive in defining any source areas at the site. More information about this site and previous investigations can be found at the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control's (DNREC) Site webpage.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Drinking Water Quality 
Newark’s drinking water is safe and continuously being treated by the city to remove volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from the water supply, enabling the water to continue meeting both Federal and State Safe Drinking Water Act standards.  The City's annual water quality reports can be accessed here. 
Remedial Investigation / Feasibility Study This site is currently in the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study stage of the Superfund Process, which involves an evaluation of: 
the nature and extent of contamination at a site,
potential threats to human health and the environment, and
potential performance and cost of the treatment options identified for a site. 
EPA has adjusted the on-going groundwater investigation to better determine the extent of contamination at the Site. The next phase of sampling is scheduled for early Spring 2025. 
Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Results from January/February 2017 Groundwater Sampling (PDF) ﻿Results from September 2017 Groundwater Sampling (PDF) Top of Page