Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 3.5-acre Hollingsworth Solderless Terminal Superfund Site includes the area where a solderless terminal manufacturing facility operated from 1968 to 1982. The EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983 because of contaminated groundwater and soil resulting from the manufacturing process. The EPA and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP)Exit have investigated site conditions. By treating groundwater and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, the EPA and FDEP continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination.
Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site.
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The EPA leads site investigation and cleanup activities in cooperation with FDEP. Broward County has also assisted the EPA with the site’s cleanup. 1982
Hollingsworth pumped out the injection well at the site. 1986
The EPA issued the site’s cleanup plan in a Record of Decision (ROD). It included: 
properly abandoning the old injection well and all other polyvinyl chloride wells on site;
treating on-site soil and groundwater contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs); and
injecting treated groundwater back into the ground. 
1989
The EPA installed a soil vapor extraction system (SVE) to treat VOC-contaminated soil located above the groundwater table. 1992
Soil samples showed that the SVE system reduced trichloroethylene (TCE) concentrations to less than one part per million. 1994
The EPA stopped groundwater recovery and treatment and removed the SVE system from the site. 2001
The EPA revised the cleanup plan through an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD). The modifications included: 
excavation of VOC-contaminated soils in the former South Drainfield and the septic tank in the West Drainfield.
replacement of the 1986 ROD's pump-and-treat remedy with in-situ enhanced bioremediation in the affected groundwater zone.
implementation of institutional controls for groundwater. 
2002
The EPA removed and disposed of contaminated soil in the south drainfield; dug up soil to a depth of two feet below the water table; and removed all contaminated soil at the site. Additionally, the EPA removed and disposed of the septic tank associated with the western drainfield. 2005-2007
The EPA performed a bioremediation study at the site from April 2005 to September 2007. The results showed a sitewide decrease in contaminant levels. 2008
The EPA revised the groundwater cleanup approach, through a ROD Amendment, to include in-place enhanced bioremediation (ISEB) to address remaining groundwater contamination. 2010
Groundwater monitoring results indicate six of the 24 groundwater wells monitored exceeded the State of Florida’s drinking water standard of one part per billion for vinyl chloride. Vinyl chloride and cis-1,2 dichloroethene are the only remaining groundwater contaminants detected above state or federal standards. 2011
Between April and September, the EPA injected liquid substrates by direct-push into eight injection wells near the South Drainfield and eight injection wells near the West Drainfield. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published by EPA HQs in 2016. The remedy currently protects human health and the environment because contaminated soils have been removed such that no land use restrictions are needed, groundwater contamination remains on site and institutional controls are in place that restrict the use of groundwater at the site. The EPA is monitoring groundwater to ensure the cleanup meets the remedial goals.  Groundwater sampling in November 2019 identified only one well with concentrations slightly exceeding remedial goals for vinyl chloride and TCE.  The EPA will continue to monitor the effect of the enhanced in-situ bioremediation cleanup approach on groundwater contamination levels until all contaminants of concern are below federal and state cleanup standards. The EPA plans to sample groundwater in April and November of 2020 and complete the next Five-Year Review in 2021. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The South Florida Water Management District has listed the site as a groundwater delineation area, which means all wells for water use placed in the area require the District’s approval.
Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
In 2011, EPA added additional potassium lactate to the groundwater as part of the enhanced in-situ bioremediation cleanup approach; the EPA is continuing to monitor its effects. Once vinyl chloride groundwater contaminant levels meet federal and state drinking water standards, the site’s cleanup will be complete and the EPA will delete the site from the NPL.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA was unable to identify any viable potentially responsible parties for the site. The EPA is using federal funds for site cleanup activities. 
Top of Page