MRI CORP (TAMPA)TAMPA, FL 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The MRI Corp (Tampa) Superfund site is located in Tampa, Florida. It includes the area where a recycling facility operated from 1961 to 1986. The EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1996 because of contaminated soil and groundwater resulting from facility operations. The EPA, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) and the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) have investigated site conditions. By conducting cleanup activities at the site, the EPA, FDEP and the site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. A water line connects residences and businesses to the public water supply. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site’s PRPs lead site investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by EPA and FDEP. EPA divided the site into two areas, referred to as operable units (OUs). 
OU-1 addresses contaminated soil and sediment.
OU-2 addresses contaminated groundwater. 
1992
EPA issued a long-term cleanup plan for OU-1. It included digging up, solidifying, stabilizing and capping contaminated soil and sediment on site placing institutional controls in the form of deed restrictions on the site property to prohibit residential use and the use of shallow groundwater for drinking water required monitoring and evaluating groundwater to determine the need for future cleanup activities. 1996
The site’s PRPs began a combined remedial investigation/feasibility study for both OUs in 1996.  2008
EPA issued a long-term cleanup plan for OU-2. It included 
digging up contaminated soils to protect groundwater from further contamination
backfilling dug-up areas with clean soil
constructing a belowground barrier wall surrounding contaminated groundwater
monitoring and using monitored natural attenuation to address contaminated groundwater outside of the containment walls.
placing institutional controls on the site property in the form of a restrictive covenant to prohibit groundwater use at the site as well as at adjacent properties and to limit future site uses to industrial and commercial land uses. 
2011
Cleanup began in 2011. Cleanup activities are complete. They include soil stabilization, construction of a below ground barrier wall surrounding contaminated groundwater and capping of the belowground barrier wall area and the area where stabilized soil was placed. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published by EPA HQs in 2022. Because the remedy at OU2 is protective in the short term, the Site's remedy is protective of human health and the environment in the short term. 
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
institutional controls in the form of deed restrictions on the site property are in place to prohibit residential use and the use of shallow groundwater for drinking water. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
In 2002 and 2009, Consent Decrees (CDs) were entered in between the EPA and the PRP to clean up the site. With remedy implementation complete, the PRPs continue to fund monitoring maintenance of the remedy. 
Top of Page