Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 310-acre Harris Corp. (Palm Bay Plant) Superfund site is located in Palm Bay in east-central Florida about three miles from the Atlantic Ocean. It includes two industrial properties where a variety of manufacturing activities have taken place since the 1950s. The site includes the 170-acre Harris Corporation property (south of Palm Bay Road) and the 140-acre Intersil Corporation property (north of Palm Bay Road). Undeveloped land, residential neighborhoods, office buildings, a park and the City of Palm Bay’s water treatment plant border the site. The nearest homes are located over a thousand feet from the site boundary. An electronics company supporting the aerospace industry operated at the site in the 1950s and 1960s. Harris Corporation acquired the company in 1967 and has been operating in Palm Bay since then. With the exception of the Former Building 100 Area, all the company's expansion efforts have been onto undeveloped property. Two previous manufacturing firms operated at the Former Building 100 Area and used it for painting operations, metal operations and barrel storage. Intersil Corporation later acquired the portion of the facility located north of Palm Bay Road from Harris Corporation. Harris Government Communications Systems Division is located south of Palm Bay Road. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1987 because of contaminated groundwater resulting from past operations. EPA, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) Exitand Harris Corporation, the site’s potentially responsible party (PRP), have investigated site conditions and taken steps to clean up the site in order to protect people and the environment from contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. Workers on site as well as nearby residents and businesses use the public water system for drinking purposes. By monitoring groundwater and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, EPA, FDEP and the PRP continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site’s PRP leads site investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by EPA and FDEP. EPA has divided the site into two areas, referred to as operable units, or OUs. OU-1 addresses groundwater contamination associated with the Harris Government Communications Systems Division property, including the Former Building 100 Area south of Palm Bay Road. OU-2 addresses groundwater contamination associated with the Intersil Corporation property north of Palm Bay Road. 1984
T﻿he PRP built an air stripping system to treat contaminated water from Palm Bay Utilities Corporation (PBUC) wells. 1985
The PRP put in place a pump-and-treat system on part of the Harris Corporation property (south of Palm Bay Road) to treat contaminated groundwater associated with OU-1. 1987
EPA listed the site on the NPL. Both the Harris and Intersil corporations continue to manufacture equipment on site. Intersil Corporation also leases portions of its property for use by other companies. 1990
EPA issued the cleanup plan for OU-1. It included continued operation of the existing groundwater pump-and-treat system; ongoing sampling of groundwater and cleanup monitoring; and review of the groundwater pump-and-treat system five years after implementation of the cleanup approach.
The PRP began using a pump-and-treat system to address groundwater contamination associated with OU-2 (north of Palm Bay Road).
1995
EPA issued the cleanup plan for OU-2. It included continued use of the groundwater pump-and-treat system; extraction of contaminated groundwater from the upper-level aquifer; treatment of extracted groundwater by air stripping; and injection of treated groundwater into the Floridan Aquifer. The plan also included groundwater monitoring. 2000
Following EPA approval, the PRP deactivated the OU-2 groundwater treatment system and currently uses monitored natural attenuation to address remaining OU-2 groundwater contamination. 2002
Following EPA approval, the PRP deactivated the OU-1 groundwater treatment system and currently uses monitored natural attenuation to address remaining OU-1 groundwater contamination. 2010
EPA enhanced the cleanup plans for the site, including an institutional control restricting access to site groundwater. The St. John’s River Water Management District’s listing of the site as a groundwater delineation area means that all wells placed in the area require the District’s approval. 2014 - 2018
The site’s third Five-Year Review, completed in 2014, found that the site cleanup approach is working as expected and continues to protect people and the environment from remaining contamination. The PRP continues to conduct regular groundwater sampling and submit annual groundwater monitoring reports to EPA and FDEP. 2019
The site’s fourth Five-Year Review, completed in April 2019, found that the site cleanup approach is working as expected and continues to protect people and the environment from remaining contamination. The PRP continues to conduct regular groundwater sampling and submit annual groundwater monitoring reports to EPA and FDEP. 2024
The site’s fifth Five-Year Review, completed in April 2024, found that the site cleanup approach is working as expected and continues to protect people and the environment from remaining contamination. The PRP continues to conduct regular groundwater sampling and submit annual groundwater monitoring reports to EPA and FDEP. The next Five-Year Review will be conducted in 2029.
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA completed the last Five-Year Review in April 2024. The site cleanup approach is working as expected and continues to protect people and the environment from remaining contamination. The PRP continues to conduct regular groundwater sampling and submit annual groundwater monitoring reports to EPA and FDEP. Ground water monitoring will continue until contaminant levels meet site cleanup goals. Contaminants of concern have continued to decrease through monitored natural attenuation. The next Five-Year Review will be conducted in 2029.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Nearby residents and businesses use the public water system for drinking purposes. Groundwater contamination does not affect the public water system. The Saint John’s River Water Management District has listed the site as a groundwater delineation area, which means all wells placed in the area require the District’s approval.
Sampling and Monitoring
The PRP continues to conduct regular ground water sampling and submit annual ground water monitoring reports to EPA and FDEP. Ground water monitoring will continue until contaminant levels meet site cleanup goals.

Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA and Florida Department of Environmental Resources (FDER, now FDEP) negotiated legal agreements with Harris Corporation, the site’s PRP, to investigate and clean up the site. Harris Corporation continues to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities.
