TAYLOR ROAD LANDFILLSEFFNER, FL 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 42-acre Taylor Road Landfill Superfund site is located in Brandon, Hillsborough County, Florida. The municipal landfill is one of three landfills owned and operated by Hillsborough County. The residential, commercial and industrial landfill operated from 1976 to 1980. EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983 because of contaminated groundwater resulting from waste handling practices. EPA, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) Exitand Hillsborough County, the site’s primary potentially responsible party (PRP), have investigated site conditions. By monitoring groundwater, placing institutional controls on the site property and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, EPA, FDEP and the site’s PRP continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. A water line connects nearby residences and businesses to the public water supply. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Hillsborough County, the site’s primary PRP, leads site cleanup activities, with oversight provided by EPA and FDEP. 1995
The site’s long-term remedy, selected in 1995, included 
using monitored natural attenuation to address groundwater contamination
implementing a quarterly groundwater monitoring program
connecting nearby residences to the public water supply
placing institutional controls on the site property to prohibit drinking water wells. 
1998 - 2000
Hillsborough County began the expansion of the site’s groundwater monitoring system. The County installed five new groundwater monitoring wells and connected seven nearby residences to the public water supply in 1999. EPA updated the remedy in 2000, removing Florida Secondary Drinking Water Standards from site groundwater cleanup requirements. EPA and the county placed institutional controls on the site property. 2000 - Present
HIllsborough Count continues to manage the property and implement the cleanup. The most recent Five Year Review was published in 2023. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published in 2023. The remedy at the Site is protective of human health and the environment. Ground water monitoring is ongoing at the site EPA will evaluate the current sampling program to optimize the long-term monitoring plan. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Appropriate institutional controls are in place to restrict construction of groundwater wells and potable use of groundwater at the Site.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA negotiated legal agreements with the site’s PRP to investigate and clean up the site. The PRP continues to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities.
Top of Page