Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 45-acre Sapp Battery Salvage Superfund site is located five miles south of Cottondale and two miles north of Alford, near the intersection of State Route 231 and County Road 280 (Corbin Road) in Jackson County, Florida. Rural residential properties border the site to the north and west. The Atlanta and St. Andrews Bay rail line borders the site to the east and Corbin Road borders the site to the south. Site surroundings include forested areas, wetlands and agricultural land uses. The site is fenced and vacant. From the early 1970s until 1980, a battery recycling facility operated at the site. Recycling operations included opening lead-acid batteries, removing the lead for recycling and discharging battery acid and plastic battery casings into an on-site pond and surrounding swamps and wetlands.  This battery recycling facility contaminated soil, sediment, surface water and groundwater, resulting in fish kills downstream. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was placed on the National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983 because of contaminated groundwater, surface water, soil, and sediments. EPA, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP)Exit and the Sapp Battery Group, the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs), have investigated site conditions. By monitoring groundwater and undertaking Five-Year Reviews (FYRs), EPA, FDEP and the site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Sapp Battery Group, the site’s PRPs, lead soil investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by EPA and FDEP. EPA leads investigation and cleanup activities of contaminated sediments in nearby swamps and wetlands as well as groundwater investigation and cleanup activities in cooperation with FDEP. During cleanup, a site can be divided into a number of distinct areas depending on the complexity of the problems associated with the site. These areas called operable units (OUs).  At Sapp, there are three OUs. 
OU-1: Source control
OU-2: Groundwater contamination
OU-3: Steel City Bay 
1986
EPA selected a remedy in 1986 which included 
excavate and treat soil contamination
excavate and dispose contaminated sediments
pump and treat groundwater. 
1999 – 2001
The site’s PRPs conducted the Operable Unit (OU)-1 source control cleanup from 1999 through 2001. Cleanup activities included digging up, solidifying, stabilizing and placing 93,944 cubic yards of soil and material in a 13-acre area on site. 2011
In 2004, EPA determined that the pump-and-treat approach would not work at the site because structure of the aquifer. As new groundwater data became available, the understanding of site conditions evolved, and new remedial approaches became feasible. In 2011, EPA issued a ROD Amendment to change the groundwater cleanup plan to monitored natural attenuation. 2007 – 2008
EPA conducted sediment cleanup activities for OU-3 in 2007 and 2008. EPA dug up and disposed of 58,347 tons of contaminated soil and sediment off site. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published by EPA in 2022.  The Sitewide Protectiveness Status is protective of human health and the enviromnent because there are no completed exposure pathways. 
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Figure 1: Institutional Control Map is available in the most recent Five Year Review.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
EPA negotiated legal agreements with the site PRPs to investigate and clean up OU-1. The PRP continues to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities. EPA continues to implement and fund cleanup activities for OU-2 and OU-3.
Top of Page