Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 11-acre Coleman-Evans Wood Preserving Co. Superfund site is located in Whitehouse, Florida. The site includes the area where Coleman-Evans Wood Preserving Co. operated a wood-preserving facility from 1954 to the mid-1980s.  The EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983 because of contaminated soil, sediment and groundwater resulting from facility operations. THe EPA and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) have investigated site conditions and taken steps to clean up the site in order to protect people and the environment from contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. By placing an institutional control (legal restrictions on the property’s reuse) on the site and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, the EPA and FDEP continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The EPA lead site investigation and cleanup activities in cooperation with FDEP. 1986 – 1994
The EPA completed emergency cleanup activities to address immediate threats at the site. These activities included digging up two on-site disposal pits, disposing of dug-up material off site, removing contaminated structures, installing a temporary fence, digging up contaminated soil and sediment in the residential area next to the site, placing the dug-up contaminated soil and sediment on site, and installing permanent fencing and signs. During this time, the EPA removed 1,000 pounds of contaminated material. 1997
The final remedy included 
digging up on-site and off-site contaminated soil and sediment
treating contaminated soil using thermal desorption
building a pump-and-treat system to address contaminated groundwater. 
1999 – 2004
From 1999 to 2004, the EPA treated contaminated soil. The EPA installed a wastewater treatment plant to treat groundwater and surface water runoff. The EPA treated over 210,000 tons of soil and 73.5 million gallons of groundwater and stormwater, separated and disposed of about 320,000 gallons of hazardous liquids, and disposed of 2,000 cubic yards of soil. 2005
The EPA updated the long-term remedy to include the use of monitored natural attenuation instead of the pump-and-treat system for remaining groundwater contamination. 2006
In 2006, the EPA issued a final long-term remedy to address remaining contaminated soil. The plan included removing remaining contaminated soil from nearby properties and disposing of the contaminated soil on site 2007
The EPA completed soil cleanup activities in 2007. The EPA placed an institutional control on the site to prohibit the use of the site for residential purposes. 2024
The EPA conducted the sixth Five-Year Review of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The sixth Five Year Review was published by EPA HQs in 2024. The remedy for the Site is protective of human health and the environment and exposure pathways that could result in unacceptable risks are being controlled. The EPA selected the long-term remedy for the site in 1986 and updated it in 1990 and 1997. The final remedy included digging up on-site and off-site contaminated soil and sediment, treating contaminated soil using thermal desorption, and building a pump-and-treat system to address contaminated groundwater. The EPA also updated the long-term remedy in 2001, 2003, 2004 and 2005 to clarify minor changes in the cleanup approach. In 2005, the change the EPA made to the long-term remedy included the use of monitored natural attenuation instead of the pump-and-treat system for remaining groundwater contamination. In 2006, the EPA issued a final long-term remedy to address remaining contaminated soil. The plan included removing remaining contaminated soil from nearby properties and disposing of the contaminated soil on site 
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Digging is not allowed at the site and new drinking water wells cannot be installed at the site. The St. John’s River Water Management District has listed the site as a groundwater delineation area, which means all wells placed in the area require the District’s approval. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
Coleman-Evans Wood Preserving Co., the site PRP, refused to be involved in site investigation and cleanup activities. The EPA used federal funds for the site’s cleanup activities. The city of Jacksonville is currently conducting operations and maintenance activities, in cooperation with the state of Florida.
Top of Page