Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 90-acre Madison County Sanitary Landfill Superfund Site is located in Madison, Florida. It includes the area where a landfill received domestic and industrial waste from 1971 to 1980. Sampling results in the mid-1980s found contamination in the groundwater. The Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) immediately installed water purification systems for residents living near the landfill. The EPA placed the Site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1990 because of contaminated soil and groundwater resulting from facility operations. The EPA, FDEP and the City of Madison, Madison County and ITT Corporation, the Site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs), City of Madison, Madison County and the ITT Corporation, have investigated Site conditions. By monitoring groundwater and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, the EPA, FDEP and the Site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the Site. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The City of Madison, Madison County and ITT Corporation, the site’s PRPs, lead cleanup activities with oversight provided by the EPA and FDEP. 1984 – 1985
PRPs removed contaminated soil and 40 drums from the landfill. 1992
The EPA issued the site’s long-term cleanup plan. It included: 
installing a clay and soil cap over the Yard Trash Area
groundwater treatment
restricting construction of water supply wells off site and future use of the landfill
monitoring groundwater
implementing operation and maintenance activities at the Site 
1995 – 1997
PRPs conducted cleanup activities from 1995 to 1997. In 1996, PRPs completed installation of the Site’s groundwater treatment system and installed three recovery wells in the Yard Trash Area. PRPs inspect the landfill quarterly. 2011
The EPA approved an addendum to the Work Plan for the Yard Trash Area Investigation to allow for additional VOCs sampling in two areas where drums containing solvents were previously excavated.  2015
The 2015 Five-Year Review determined that the remedy is protective in the short term.  In order for the remedy to remain protective in the long term, additional monitoring and sampling will be obtained by installing wells downgradient of the Yard Trash Area and determine if a vapor intrusion evaluation is warranted. Vapor intrusion was not found to be an issue at the Site. 2019
A Restrictive Covenant was signed to protect the landfill cap from damage and restrict installation of on Site water wells. A Treatability Study was conducted in 2019 to evaluate In-situ enhanced bioremediation (ISBR) as a method to remediate the additional source material found. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Ground water monitoring will continue for the Site. An investigation for additional source material started in 2011. A Treatability Study was conducted in 2019 to evaluate In-situ enhanced bioremediation (ISBR) as a method to remediate the additional source material found. The EPA, in consultation with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), issued a Proposed Plan to provide rationale for amending the current groundwater remedy and to present its Preferred Alternative to remediate contaminants of concern in groundwater at the Madison County Sanitary Landfill Site. View the video presentation to learn more. The EPA and FDEP are soliciting community involvement in the selection of the remedial action and invite the public to comment on all alternatives presented in the Feasibility Study and summarized in the Proposed Plan. The public comment period was open from December 15, 2021 - January 14, 2022. The EPA published the fifth Five-Year Review in 2020. The 2025 sixth Five-Year Review is on going and will be published here when completed. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
ICs are in placed to restrict construction of water supply wells on and off site and protect the landfill cover from damage. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws. In 1990, the EPA entered into a Consent Order with the potentially responsible parties (PRPs), requiring them to undertake a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study for the Site. A Unilateral Administrative Order for Remedial Action was issued by the EPA in February 1995 directing the PRPs to implement the cleanup activities described in the ROD. Top of Page