Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 12-acre Hipps Road Landfill Superfund site is located on the southeastern corner of Hipps Road and Exline Road in Jacksonville Heights, a suburb of Jacksonville, Florida. Site features include a mound over the landfill area and a basin for storm water retention. Single-family homes and mobile homes border the site. A large subdivision is located a quarter-mile west of the site. The Hipps Road Landfill site includes a 6-acre swamp area where Waste Control of Florida (WCF) operated a waste management facility from the mid-1960s until 1970. The U.S. Navy and other sources disposed of materials at the landfill. In 1970, landfill operations ended and WCF covered the area with a thin layer of soil and subdivided the property into residential lots. In the early 1980s, residents complained about unusual tastes and odors in private well water and EPA identified contamination in the ground water. EPA placed the site on the National Priorities List (NPL) in 1984 because of contaminated soil and ground water resulting from improper landfill closure. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), and WCF and the U.S. Navy, the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs), have investigated site conditions.  By monitoring ground water and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, EPA, FDEP and the site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. The Site was deleted from the NPL in December 2012 since it had attained all cleanup standards set out in the Record of Decision. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. A water line connects residences and businesses near the site to the public water supply. The site is currently in ecological reuse as a wildlife habitat area. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
1986
EPA issued a cleanup plan (a Record of Decision, or ROD) for the site. The plan included the following activities: 
Closing and capping the landfill.
Removing and treating contaminated ground water at the local water treatment plant.
Monitoring ground water.
Maintaining the ground water recovery system.
Maintaining the landfill cap.
Placing institutional controls on the site property.
Placing a fence around the site.
Prohibiting the construction of wells in the contaminated area. 
1988 – 1989
The site’s PRPs acquired five homes located on the landfill and removed the structures from the site. The PRPs placed a clay cap system over the landfill and installed a fence around the site. PRPs also constructed a perimeter ditch within the fenced area to retain runoff from the landfill cap. 1990
The PRPs completed the closure of the landfill in 1990. EPA amended the 1986 ROD to provide for on-site ground water treatment and disposal. 1994
The site’s PRPs constructed the ground water treatment system specified in the 1986 ROD and began treating ground water at the site. EPA issued an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) to change the method used to abandon private wells affected by contaminated ground water. 1996
In 1996, the PRPs installed a pipeline to connect the on-site ground water treatment system to the local water treatment plant. EPA issued a second ESD to allow treatment of ground water at the local water treatment plant instead of treating and disposing of site ground water on site. 1999
EPA and the PRPs conducted a study to determine if MNA would be effective at the site. 2004
EPA issued a third ESD to change ground water treatment from the existing system to monitored natural attenuation. 2011
The site became the 500th Superfund site to meet the Sitewide Ready for Anticipated Use Measure. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The sixth Five Year Review was published by EPA HQs in 2020. The remedy at the Site is protective of human health and the environment due to the landfill cap, land use and groundwater Well institutional controls and achievement of all ROD cleanup goals. 
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The St. John’s River Water Management District has listed the site and nearby surrounding area as a ground water delineation area, which means all wells placed in the area require the District’s approval. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
WMC is required to continue existing monitoring of the well network and conduct periodic sampling to monitor the concentration of benzene and vinyl chloride in the ground water.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
EPA negotiated legal agreements with the site’s PRPs to investigate and clean up the site. The PRPs continue to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities.
Top of Page