Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Kassauf-Kimerling Battery Disposal Superfund Site (also referred to as the 58th Street Landfill Site) is located in Tampa, Florida. It includes a former peat extraction area later used as a landfill in the 1970s. The EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1993 because of contaminated sediment, soil, surface water and groundwater resulting from past waste handling operations. The EPA, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP)Exit, and Gulf Coast Lead, Inc., Mr. Kassauf and Mr. Kimerling, the Site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs), have investigated site conditions. By monitoring groundwater, placing institutional controls on the site property and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, the EPA, FDEP and the site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. After cleanup, theEPA took the site off the NPL in 2000. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the Site. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Gulf Coast Lead, Inc., Kassauf-Kimerling Company, the site’s PRPs, lead site investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by the EPA and FDEP. For cleanup, the EPA divided the site into two areas, referred to as operable units, or OUs: 
OU-1 addresses contamination in the landfill area.
OU-2 addresses contamination in the marsh and wetland area. In 1989, EPA selected the long-term remedy for OU-1. It included digging up waste material; treating the dug-up materials and soil; and disposing of treated soil in the landfill. 
1985 – 1988
The EPA conducted site investigations from 1985 to 1988 to identify contamination in soils and surficial groundwater at the landfill as well as in surface water and sediments in the marsh next to the Site. 1989
The EPA selected the long-term remedy for OU-1. It included: 
digging up waste material
treating the dug-up materials and soil
disposing of treated soil in the landfill. 
1990
Th﻿e EPA selected the long-term remedy for OU-2. It included: 
digging up and solidifying contaminated sediment in the marsh and canal east of the Site
flooding the marsh year round
restoring, establishing or enhancing a new wetland or the existing wetlands and marsh area to compensate for the adversely impacted marsh, also known as wetland mitigation
wetland mitigation next to the site but did not specify any particular requirements. A private citizen owned the area of the marsh affected by contamination from the landfill. The site’s PRPs offered to buy the property but the owner refused to sell it. 
1994
The EPA revised the OU-2 cleanup plan to explain that McKay Bay was an unacceptable alternate location for implementation of the wetlands mitigation because of contamination in the bay. PRPs completed cleanup activities for OU-1 and OU-2. In 1997, PRPs agreed to start the Mobbly Bay wetland mitigation project. All construction at Mobbly Bay has been completed. 1997
The EPA revised the OU-2 cleanup plan again to change the location of the wetlands mitigation from McKay Bay to Mobbly Bay, located in Northern Tampa Bay. The project site includes several manmade open-water ponds. 1998
PRPs began groundwater monitoring. 2000
After completion of cleanup activities, the EPA took the site off the NPL. 2010
The EPA revised the OU-1 cleanup plan to place institutional controls on the site property to make sure areas addressed by the cleanup plan are not disturbed without the prior permission of the EPA and FDEP. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five-Year Review was published by the EPA HQs in 2014. Because the remedial actions at all OUs are protective In the short term, the Site Is protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Ground water monitoring is ongoing. All necessary institutional controls are in place on the main facility of the Site and the marsh, east of the Site. The EPA plans to complete the next Five-Year Review in 2029. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The Southwest Florida Water Management District has listed the Site and nearby surrounding area as a groundwater delineation area, which means all wells placed in the area require the District’s approval. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Ground water monitoring is ongoing to confirm the effectiveness of the soil stabilization used in the cleanup approaches for OU-1 and OU-2. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA conducted site investigations but later negotiated legal agreements with the site PRPs to clean up the site. The PRPs continue to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities.
Top of Page