CONTINENTAL CLEANERSMIAMI, FL 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Continental Cleaners Superfund site is located at 798 NW 62nd Street at the intersection of NW 62nd Street and NW 8th Avenue in the Liberty City neighborhood in Miami, Florida. The Site is less than an acre in size and features a single-story, 2,400-square-foot building built in 1938. The property was originally a gas station and possibly an automobile repair shop. Continental Cleaners operated a laundry and dry-cleaning services facility at the Site from 1967 until about 2005. In the 1990s, local officials identified the release of dry-cleaning chemicals to the ground and ground water. Since then, numerous studies have documented tetrachloroethylene (also known as PCE or PERC), a common dry-cleaning solvent, and its breakdown products in the soil and groundwater at the Site. The Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP)Exit determined that the Site was ineligible to participate in the state Dry-cleaning Solvent Cleanup Program due to gross negligence at the site. The EPA placed the Site on the Superfund Program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in March 2012 because of contaminated soil and groundwater resulting from dry cleaning activities. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the Site. Residents and businesses near the Site use the public water system for drinking water. By treating groundwater and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, the EPA and FDEP continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The EPA leads remedial investigation and cleanup activities, in cooperation with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP)Exit. The EPA typically conducts groundwater studies in phases, collecting samples from the source area and then moving further away as far as the contamination may have migrated. 
When
What﻿
﻿2012
June The first sample collection for the remedial investigation was focused on the soil and groundwater on the former dry-cleaning property. Dry cleaning solvents were found at levels above cleanup levels in both the soil and groundwater.
﻿2013
January The Remedial Investigation Report was approved. June Groundwater samples were collected in the neighborhood around the facility and contaminants such as tetrachloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE) and vinyl chloride were found to have migrated north of the facility above its cleanup level. September Fourteen (14) permanent monitoring wells were installed and sampled. This phased strategy allowed the EPA to use its funds effectively and collect sufficient data to determine the most appropriate cleanup option. December The Remedial Investigation Report was approved.
﻿2014
February The results of all sampling efforts were included in the Draft Remedial Investigation Report
﻿2016
 December Potential cleanup options were evaluated in the Feasibility Study Report.
﻿2017
 August The Proposed Plan was published.
﻿2018
April An Interim Record of Decision (IROD) was issued. It addresses both groundwater and soil. There will also be  Institutional Controls placed on the property until the property is determined to have unlimited use and unrestricted exposure associated with the contamination in the groundwater under the property.  For contaminated soil the preferred option is Alternative S-2B: 
demolish the building; excavate all soils contaminated above the specified cleanup levels;
dispose of contaminated soils off-site at an EPA-approved facility;
backfill the excavated area with clean soil, regrade and revegetate the disturbed area;
and, place Institutional Controls (ICs) on the property until the property is determined to have unlimited use and unrestricted exposure associated with the contamination in the groundwater under the property.
 For contaminated groundwater, the preferred option is Alternative GW-2 - Implement Enhanced In Situ Bioremediation (EISB) to destroy the volatile organic compounds in the groundwater under and immediately downgradient of the CC property. Additional injections of EISB-related chemicals (emulsified vegetable oil, a pH buffering agent, etc.) may occur, as needed, until the cleanup levels of the contaminants in the groundwater in this area are met. Continued monitoring of the downgradient diffused portion of the groundwater plume in order to evaluate the impact of the above actions will have on this portion of the groundwater plume and collect additional geochemical data in order to complete the evaluation of suitable remediation technologies for the downgradient diffused portion of the plume.﻿
2023
September The EPA issued an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD), which explains the changes in the ROD.
The EPA installed a Passive Soil Venting (SV) System to minimize volatile organic compounds (VOCs) entering the building on Site. VOCs are emitted as gases from certain solids or liquids.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
On September 6, 2023, the EPA installed a Passive Soil Venting (SV) System to minimize volatile organic compounds (VOCs) entering the building on Site. VOCs are emitted as gases from certain solids or liquids. There is more groundwater cleanup anticipted for the Site. This work will include injecting oxidants to clean up the groundwater, installing new wells, and taking samples. Continued monitoring of the downgradient diffused portion of the groundwater plume in order to evaluate the impact of the above actions will have on this portion of the groundwater plume and collect additional geochemical data in order to complete the evaluation of suitable remediation technologies for the downgradient diffused portion of the plume. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional Controls (ICs) have been placed on the site until the property is determined to have unlimited use and unrestricted exposure associated with the contamination in the groundwater under the Site. The EPA uses institutional controls to help minimize the potential for human exposure to contamination and/or protect the integrity of the remedy. Institutional controls are non-engineered instruments such as administrative and legal controls that can help guide human behavior through terms such as deed restrictions and public health warning signs. Top of Page