ARKLA TERRA PROPERTYTHONOTOSASSA, FL 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Arkla Terra Property Superfund site is in Thonotosassa, Florida. It includes an area where companies operated an underground storage tank refurbishment facility from 1976 to 2006. Operators stored over 500 storage tanks on the site property at one time, along with other types of containers. Operators used solvents, including tetrachloroethylene (also known as PCE or PERC), to clean the tanks prior to their repair. EPA placed the site on the Superfund Program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 2009 because of contaminated groundwater and soil resulting from facility operations.  Groundwater contamination has affected private water wells. Over 100 properties have been connected to the public water system. Several businesses currently operate on site, including an accounting company, an environmental consulting firm, a concrete cutting business, an automotive store and a landscaping business. EPA, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), and the Hillsborough County Health Department have investigated site conditions and taken steps to clean up the site. EPA continued site investigations to evaluate the need for more cleanup activities. Through monitoring, investigations and ongoing cleanup actions, EPA, FDEP and Hillsborough County continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA leads site investigation and cleanup activities in cooperation with FDEP. 2013
EPA completed thermal treatment of the source area, which consisted of removing 1,491 pounds of PCE from the subsurface. The thermal treatment system was intended to quickly recover PCE bound in the soil matrix. Twenty-seven buried electrodes in nine boreholes (three depth zones) were installed as part of the system. The electrodes passed electrical current through the soil, directly raising the soil temperature through resistance heating. PCE is “boiled off” by the increased temperature, making recovery of contaminants more efficient.  Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA has completed the remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) and has recommended monitored natural attenuation for groundwater with land use controls as the final remedy for the site. After the public meeting and comment period, the Agency selected the remedy in a Record of Decision, which was signed in August 2018. 
EPA is currently performing cleanup activities during the Summer of 2020 in cooperation with FDEP.
EPA continues to sample private drinking water wells on and around the site regularly. 
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
For the Arkla Terra Property site, EPA has selected land use controls, including Institutional controls﻿ (ICs) and engineering controls (ECs). The ICs selected will prohibit potable groundwater use onsite.; e.g., wells may not used for drinking water, but may still be used for irrigation. Additionally, EPA has selected on site engineering controls in case they are needed to protect potential future building occupants from possible exposure to onsite vapors. Implementation and enforcement of ICs for contaminated groundwater requires the assistance of regulatory authorities such as the Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFMD) and other various local government authorities. SWFWMD through its permitting process, protects the water resources to prevent the spread of ground or surface water contamination. Well construction permits will include reviewing the use of the wells as a potable water supply within the boundaries of the Arkla Terra Superfund site. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
EPA has been collecting residential well water samples since 2009 between Ohio Avenue to the north and Joe Roberts Road to the south. Sampling has identified contamination in some wells. The county health department and FDEP, have provided filtration systems for those wells. Hillsborough County has also extended municipal water lines into affected areas to connect residences to the public water supply. Not all residents chose to connect to the public water system. In the summer of 2019, EPA is connecting residents within the PCE contaminated groundwater plume  to the public water supply. EPA believes that off-site groundwater contamination has been reduced and should be below federal and state levels of concern within the next five years. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws. EPA is funding the cost of the investigation and cleanup. The Agency has received some reimbursement from responsible parties. Top of Page