Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 813-acre LCP Chemicals Superfund Georgia Site is located in Brunswick, Georgia. The site includes an area where various industrial facilities operated from the early 1920s to 1994.  Manufacturing activities, including an oil refinery, a paint manufacturing company, a power plant and a chlor-alkali plant, caused contamination at the site. The EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1996 because of contaminated groundwater, soil and sediment resulting from facility operations. The EPA, the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (Georgia EPD) and the Site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) are investigating site conditions. By investigating Site conditions, undertaking removal actions and limiting access to contaminated areas, The EPA, Georgia EPD and the Site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from Site contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the Site. The State of Georgia has imposed seafood consumption advisories for the Brunswick-St. Simons estuary due to mercury and PCB concentrations.   Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The potentially responsible parties (PRPs) lead site investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by the EPA and Georgia EPD. The EPA divided the site into three work components, referred to as operable units, or OUs. 
OU-1 is the 670-acre marsh area
OU-2 addresses groundwater contamination and the soil beneath the former mercury cell buildings
OU-3 addresses rest of the upland soil. 
1990s
Between 1994 and 1999, PRPs undertook multiple short-term cleanup actions. PRPs completed a removal action on the 123-acre upland portion of the site that included digging up contaminated soils and industrial process waste from 26 contaminated areas. In 1995, the EPA started remedial investigations/feasibility studies (RI/FS). Following completion of the RI/FS for each OU, the EPA planned to issue long-term cleanup plans for the site. Between 1998 and 1999, site PRPs also conducted a removal action to include 13 acres of marshland and parts of the tidal channels. 2007
In 2007, the EPA issued an Order for the neutralization of the caustic brine pool OU 1 
2015
In September 2015, the EPA, in consultation with Georgia EPD, issued the cleanup decision for the marsh (OU1). The Remedial design is now in its early stages and is scheduled for completion in December 2020. OU 2
2010 – 2017
The PRPs constructed a caustic brine pool (CBP) extraction and on-site treatment system to address part of OU-2 (the site's groundwater and soil beneath the former mercury cell buildings). However, the system performed far below design expectations and the approach was not felt to be salvageable. 2012 – 2013
In 2012, the PRP evaluated multiple technologies to address the CBP-contaminated groundwater, to include extracting the CBP for off-site treatment and disposal, as well as treating it on site. During 2012 and 2013, the PRP and its consultants conducted an on-site “Proof of Concept for Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Sparging” pilot treatability study on a portion of the CBP. In May 2013, the EPA, in consultation with the state of Georgia, approved the full-scale implementation of the CO2 sparging system, which was constructed during the summer and early fall of 2013.  2016
As of May 2016, 543 tons of carbon dioxide had been sparged into the surficial aquifer. The initial post-sparge groundwater sampling was completed in April 2016. A report presenting the results of the third phase of sparging and groundwater monitoring results was submitted in July 2016. 2017
In October 2017, as subsequent round of groundwater monitoring took place. The carbon dioxide sparging, for the most part, neutralized the high pH caustic brine pool. This has made the mercury and other heavy metals less mobile in the aquifer.   OU 3
2018
The EPA and Georgia EPD approved the OU-3 (the site's uplands, excluding the mercury cell building) ecological risk assessment in July 2010, the human health risk assessment in February 2012 and remedial investigation in early 2013. The EPA and Georgia EPD will return to finalizing the OU3 feasibility study during the spring of 2018. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The responsible parties – Honeywell and Georgia Power – implemented a pilot study in two areas that total approximately 2/3 of an acre. The pilot study invloved sediment sampling for marsh contaminants before a thin-layer cover was applied and then resampling of the areas several times after application. The study will provide data to advance the design of the full-scale remedy and enable contractors to develop effective techniques to minimize disruption to the marsh. Construction began in late February and concluded in early March 2018. A period of monitoring will take place over the next 24 months to make sure that the thin-layer cover is effective. ﻿It is anticipated that the EPA will select long-term remedies for OU-2 and OU-3 soon. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The Site's Uplands are classified as basic industrial (BI). This classification precludes use of the uplands for residential purposes. The State of Georgia has imposed seafood consumption advisories for the Brunswick-St. Simons estuary due to mercury and PCB concentrations. Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
All emercency responses and removal-related activities at the LCP Chemicals Site took place during the late 1990s.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA negotiated legal agreements with Site PRPs to investigate and clean up the Site. The PRPs continue to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities. In 1998, the EPA agreed to provide funding to assist with removal action efforts, and site PRPs agreed to reimburse the EPA for all future costs. In 2007, the EPA issued an Order for the neutralization of the caustic brine pool. Top of Page