MATHIS BROTHERS LANDFILL (SOUTH MARBLE TOP ROAD)KENSINGTON, GA 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
 The 10-acre Mathis Brothers Landfill (South Marble Top Road) Superfund site is located in Kensington, Georgia. It includes an area where a landfill operated from 1974 to 1980. EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989 because of contaminated debris, groundwater and soil resulting from landfill operations. EPA, the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (Georgia EPD) and Velsicol, the site’s potentially responsible party (PRP), have investigated site conditions. By monitoring groundwater, inspecting the site and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, EPA, Georgia EPD and the site’s PRP continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. A water line connects nearby businesses and residents to the public water supply. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Velsicol, the site’s PRP, leads site cleanup activities with oversight provided by EPA and Georgia EPD. 1993
The site’s long-term cleanup plan included 
diverting surface water away from the site
digging up contaminated waste and soil and separating the dug-up materials
collecting and treating groundwater off site as necessary
disposing of non-hazardous waste at an off-site landfill
blending of contaminants off site at a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)-approved facility.
incinerating and disposing of contaminated wastes and soil at an off-site facility
using living organisms to break down contamination or incinerating waste at an off-site facility
placing clean soil in the dug-up areas
placing a soil cap and ground cover over the backfilled areas
installing additional monitoring wells
placing institutional controls on the site property to restrict the use of groundwater on site. 
1997 - 1998
The site’s PRPs conducted cleanup activities in 1997 and 1998. Activities included 
digging up landfill material and contaminated soil
grading the site with berms around the dug-up area to prevent groundwater from entering the area
regrading to divert surface water flow
backfilling the dug-up area with off-site soil
installed a liner and clean soil over the backfilled area
established a vegetative cover over the area
transported water off site for treatment and disposal. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published by EPA HQs in 2017. The remedy currently protects human health and the environment in the short-term because contaminated soils were excavated from the Site and replaced with clean fill and a cap. Groundwater contamination has remained within the property boundary and has not been used for consumption. 
The site’s PRP continues to monitor ground water, mow the vegetative cover, and inspect the cap and perimeter fencing semi-annually. EPA is working to place institutional controls on the site property. The next FYR is scheduled to be completed in September 2022.
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
EPA is working to place institutional controls on the site property.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA negotiated legal agreements with the site’s PRP to investigate and clean up the site. The PRP continues to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities.
Top of Page