DEL MONTE CORP. (OAHU PLANTATION)KUNIA, HI 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Del Monte Corp. (Oahu Plantation) site is located near Kunia Village in Honolulu County, Hawaii. The site is within the footprint of a former pineapple plantation.  The Del Monte Corporation grew and processed pineapple on the plantation from about 1946 to 2006. The company used pesticides to control worms. In 1977, an accidental 500-gallon pesticide spill occurred next to the Kunia drinking water supply well, which contributed to contaminated site soil and groundwater. EPA added the site to the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1994. Del Monte leased the site from the James Campbell Company, the property owners, until the Oahu Plantation ceased operation in 2006.    
Del Monte treated contaminated groundwater in the basal aquifer from 2004 until 2014. The current site remedy includes monitored natural attenuation (MNA) of groundwater in the basal aquifer. Natural attenuation is the use of naturally occurring physical, chemical and biological processes that act without human intervention to reduce toxicity, mass, mobility and concentration of contaminants.
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA is monitoring contaminant levels in the basal aquifer to ensure that they are decreasing. EPA delisted the Poamoho section of the site from the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in January 2004. Investigation results showed the area poses no significant threat to human health or the environment. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
FIVE-YEAR REVIEW (2025): EPA will conduct the fourth Five-Year Review for the Del Monte Corp. (Oahu Plantation) Superfund Site in 2025. The purpose of the Five-Year Review is to evaluate the protectiveness of the remedial action ("cleanup"). The Five-Year Review will include a site inspection, extensive review of site data, and interviews with stakeholders to assess protectiveness of the remedial action that was selected in the 2003 Record of Decision (ROD) and the 2022 Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD). We will complete the Five-Year Review report no later than September 30, 2025. When complete, EPA will post a copy on the report on this webpage and send a copy to the information repository.
FIVE-YEAR REVIEW (2020): In September 2020, EPA completed the Third Five-Year Review Report for the site. The 2020 Five-Year Review concluded that groundwater levels in the basal aquifer are near or below "background" levels of ethylene dibromide (EDB), 1,2-dibromo-3-chloropropane (DBCP) , 1,2-dichloropropane (1,2-DCP) and 1,2,3-trichloropropane (1,2,3-TCP). However, the levels of DBCP and 1,2,3-TCP are above Hawaii maximum contaminant levels (MCLs). Background levels are due to the historic application of pesticides in the area. The remedy for the site was determined to be protective of human health and the environment, and there was no exposure to untreated perched or basal aquifer groundwater.
Top of Page