RED OAK CITY LANDFILLRED OAK, IA 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 40-acre Red Oak City Landfill site is near Red Oak, Iowa. Landfilling practices at the site from 1962 to 1974 contaminated groundwater, surface water and soil with volatile organic compounds and heavy metals. Following cleanup, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in 2005. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site was addressed through federal and potentially responsible parties’ actions. The city of Red Oak and Magna International, Inc., are managing the project with oversight by the EPA. The EPA has conducted several Five-Year Reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews evaluate whether the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review in 2022 concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by the EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
In September 1984, the EPA observed contaminated water seeping from the landfill into the East Nishnabotna River and collected environmental samples to evaluate the situation. Several VOCs were detected, and the EPA completed site investigation activities in 1985. The site was listed on the NPL in 1986. A primary concern at the site is its proximity to the Red Oak public water supply, which is approximately 2.3 miles south-southeast of the landfill.   The EPA conducted a Remedial Investigation of the site from 1989 to 1992, and selected the final remedy in 1993, which consists of a clay cap over the landfill, stabilization of the river bank, fencing of the site, deed restrictions and monitoring of the groundwater and surface water near the landfill. Conditions at the site changed due to a flood in 1993, which caused the EPA to modify the 1993 remedy by issuing a modification in 1996. The modified remedy slightly changes the bank stabilization and landfill capping components of the original remedy.  In September 1984, the EPA observed contaminated water seeping from the landfill into the East Nishnabotna River and collected environmental samples to evaluate the situation. Several VOCs were detected, and the EPA completed site investigation activities in 1985. The site was listed on the NPL in 1986.  A primary concern at the site is its proximity to the Red Oak public water supply, which is approximately 2.3 miles south-southeast of the landfill.   The EPA conducted a Remedial Investigation of the site from 1989 to 1992 and selected the final remedy in 1993, which consists of a clay cap over the landfill, stabilization of the river bank, fencing of the site, deed restrictions and monitoring of the groundwater and surface water near the landfill. Conditions at the site changed due to a flood in 1993, which caused the EPA to modify the 1993 remedy by issuing a modification in 1996. The modified remedy slightly changes the bank stabilization and landfill capping components of the original remedy. 
Cleanup activities at the site began in 1997. The landfill cap, river bank stabilization, site fencing and groundwater monitoring wells were installed later in 1997. Cap and river bank repairs were completed in 1998 and in 1999. Deed restrictions were placed on the landfill property, including placement on Iowa’s Registry of Hazardous Waste Disposal Sites. A Certificate of Completion of Remedial Action was issued by the EPA in November 2002. The site was deleted from the NPL in September 2005. Because waste remains in place at the site, monitoring of the remedy, including groundwater and surface water monitoring, continues.The EPA is evaluating cleanup progress at the site and conducts reviews of site activities at least every five years. The next Five-Year Review is scheduled for 2027.  Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
There are deed restrictions for this property.
Top of Page