Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Peoples Natural Gas site was a former manufactured gas plant that operated from approximately the 1930s to 1954. During operation of the plant, coal tar and cyanide-bearing wood chips were produced and stored onsite. Coal tar was stored in one underground tank and one above-ground tank on the site. The wood chips were buried on the eastern portion of the site. The eastern portion of the site is owned by the city of Dubuque. The city operated a public works garage on the property until 2006. This garage was demolished in 2016. A new building was constructed on the same footprint and was completed in early 2018. It houses the local public transit operations and is known as the Jule Operations and Training Center. The western portion of the site is owned by the Iowa Department of Transportation. A section of U.S. Highway 61 was constructed on this part of the site following completion of a removal action to address contaminated soil.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Contamination at the site was first identified during a geotechnical investigation conducted in preparation for construction of a new section of U.S. Highway 61 across the western portion of the site. In June 1988, the EPA proposed that the site be listed on the National Priorities List (NPL), and on August 30, 1990, the site was listed on the NPL. In 1989, Midwest Gas (now MidAmerican Energy Company), the Iowa Department of Transportation and the city of Dubuque, Iowa, signed an Administrative Order on Consent with the EPA agreeing to conduct a Removal Action and a remedial investigation and feasibility study. The removal action began in 1989. During the removal action, 6,850 cubic yards of contaminated soil and wastes from the area where the highway construction was to take place were excavated and incinerated off-site. In 1991, MidAmerican Energy completed the remedial investigation and feasibility study. The EPA selected the remedy for the site in a Record of Decision in September 1991. The selected remedy in the Record of Decision included the following actions:
excavation and incineration of contaminated soil;
enhanced in situ bioremediation to treat the contaminated groundwater and contaminated source soils in the silty sand aquifer;
groundwater extraction and monitoring of both the silty sand and alluvial aquifers.
It was determined during the remedial design that the contaminant concentrations in the alluvial aquifer did not warrant installation of a groundwater extraction system in that aquifer. This modification of the remedy was documented in an Explanations of Significant Differences in 2000. A second Explanation of Significant Differences in 2004 modified the cleanup levels for some contaminants in groundwater to reflect current regulatory levels. It was determined that it would not be technically possible to cleanup groundwater as specified in the Record of Decision. A Record of Decision Amendment was signed by the EPA in September 2013, incorporating a technical impracticability waiver for the site. The amended remedy included the following elements:
institutional controls in conjunction with a hydraulic containment system consisting of extraction wells located between Kerper Boulevard and the levee to prevent migration of the contaminated groundwater;
groundwater monitoring to verify that natural attenuation is continuing to reduce contaminant concentrations in the dissolved plume supporting plume stability;
a technical impracticability waiver for groundwater in the area designated as the TI zone;
﻿updated cleanup levels for several of the contaminants
In 1992, Midwest Gas, the Iowa Department of Transportation, the city of Dubuque, Iowa and Enron Corporation entered into a Consent Decree where they agreed to perform the cleanup of the site. Construction of the remedy in the 1991 Record of Decision was completed in 2000. Construction of the amended remedy was completed in 2014.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The original remedy included excavation and off-site incineration of contaminated soil and pumping and treatment of contaminated groundwater. Soil excavation and incineration was completed in 1998. Groundwater pumping and treatment began in 1996 and ended in 2003, when it was determined that the system would be incapable of cleaning up the groundwater. An ozone sparging system to treat groundwater was installed and operated from 2000 to 2002. This system was intended to enhance the removal of contamination by blowing ozone into the subsurface and using a vacuum to remove the contaminant vapors that were released. Once the ozone sparging system and the groundwater pumping and treatment system were determined to be unable to clean up the groundwater, additional investigations were conducted to evaluate alternative cleanup approaches. It was decided that there was too much contamination remaining below the water table in areas where it could not be removed or treated for the groundwater to ever meet all of the cleanup levels. A portion of the subsurface was identified as a "technical impracticability zone." This is an area where it has been determined that cleanup levels cannot be achieved in a reasonable amount of time with any technology presently available so other means have to be taken to protect human health and the environment. This was documented in the 2013 Record of Decision Amendment. The amended remedy includes a pumping system between the site and the Mississippi River to capture any contaminated groundwater and a notice placed on the deeds for all parcels of property that comprise the site in the form of an environmental covenant to restrict the use of the property. The property may not be used as a residence or day care, wells may not be installed, excavation below six feet is very limited and any future buildings on the property must address potential vapor intrusion into the building. MidAmerican Energy is operating the pumping system and monitoring groundwater. The Jule Operations and Training Center, which was completed in early 2018, includes several design features to prevent the possibility of vapor intrusion from the site including raising the building four feet higher than the previous building on the site; placing a vapor barrier beneath the floor of the building and constructing the floor of the building in one piece. The EPA has conducted several Five-Year Reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews evaluate whether the remedies put in place protect human health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review was completed in December 2020 and concluded that the remedy is protective in the short-term because institutional controls are in place preventing unacceptable exposure to contaminants remaining on site. The remedy will be protective in the long term when it is determined whether the hydraulic containment system is capturing all contaminated groundwater moving from the site toward the Mississippi River. Work is already taking place to determine whether groundwater from the site is able to reach Dove Harbor. This work should be concluded in 2022. In the meantime, no one is being exposed to contaminated groundwater. The next Five-Year Review is due in 2025.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
An environmental covenant exists on each of the three parcels of property that comprise the site. The covenant on the site property owned by the city of Dubuque is document number 008321640012 recorded with the Dubuque County Recorder on 9/28/2015 includes the following activity and use limitations: a. Owners of the property shall notify all occupants or tenants or any subsequent transferee of an interest in the property of these Activity and Use Limitations and this Environmental Covenant. Owners of the property shall condition all occupancy and tenancy on compliance with these Activity and Use Limitations and this Environmental Covenant. The Holders identified herein have executed this Environmental Covenant and are bound by such Activity and Use Limitations without further notice. Failure by any occupant or tenant to comply with these Activity and Use Limitations does not excuse compliance by the then existing owner with these Activity and Use Limitations. b. The property shall not be used for any purpose other than commercial or industrial. Such allowed use shall include a bus maintenance and storage facility, with offices and employee comfort facilities. c. The property shall not be used for residential use or use where children may be present for extended periods of time, including school or day care. d. Except for wells authorized by the EPA or IDNR, installation and/or use of wells for any puipose whatsoever, including but not limited to potable and non-potable water supply, for human or animal consumption, irrigation, heat pumps or sanitation, is prohibited. e. Existing wells located on the property shall not be abandoned or closed without the approval of the EPA or IDNR. f. Unless prior approval is given by the EPA, any new construction of enclosed buildings at the property must prevent, or include remedial systems to control and/or abate vapor intrusion of Contaminants of Concern, as listed on Exhibit B, into any such new construction at the property, if necessary for compliance with published standards for protectiveness of human health and the environment and appropriate for the intended use of the buildings. Such remedial systems must be properly operated and maintained. g. Any person undertaking excavation or construction activities that may disturb soil at any depth in the area of the former public works garage, or in other areas of the property at a depth of more than six feet below the surface grade, shall provide no less than 30 days advance written notice thereof to the EPA and Holder. Such excavation or construction shall not proceed without prior written approval by the Agency, unless the excavation or construction is part of an Environmental Response Project that has been approved by the Agency. Such prior notice and approval is not required for emergency circumstances, in which case notice must be given as soon as possible. h. If during the time of their ownership, tenancy or occupancy, the owner, tenant or occupant observes or is given notice that some other party, including but not limited to a utility easement holder, is, without EPA approval, undertaking either emergency or non-emergency excavation or construction activities subject to Agency approval under paragraph 7(g) said owners, tenants or occupants shall (i) promptly provide a copy to such other party engaged in such activities of these Activity and Use Limitations; (ii) promptly notify such other party that all appropriate and necessary assessments and precautions should be taken prior to such activities, including but not limited to employee protection and hazardous substance management; (iii) promptly notify the EPA of the other party's activity or planned activity and contact information for such other party, if known; and (iv) promptly notify such other party that the materials generated at or from the excavation or construction activities must be properly managed as may be required by law, making all appropriate and necessary assessment prior to such management. The covenant on one of two pieces of the site property owned by the Iowa Department of Transportation is document number 201600005376 recorded with the Dubuque County Recorder on 5/10/2016 includes the following activity and use limitations: a. Owners of the property shall notify all tenants in any buildings on the property or occupants in any buildings on the property (hereafter "tenants or occupants") of these Activity and Use Limitations and shall condition all occupancy and tenancy of any buildings on compliance with these Activity and Use Limitations. The Holder identified herein has executed this Environmental Covenant and is bound by such Activity and Use Limitations ithout further notice. Failure by any tenant or occupant to comply with these Activity and Use Limitations does not excuse compliance by the then existing owner with these Activity and Use Limitations. b. The property shall not be used for any purpose other than commercial, industrial or any and all highway or transportation purposes and matters relating thereto. c. The property shall not be used for residential use or use where children may be present for extended periods of time, including school or day care. d. Except for monitoring wells authorized by the EPA or IDNR, installation and/or use of wells for any purpose whatsoever, including but not limited to potable and non-potable water supply, for human or animal consumption, irrigation, heat pumps or sanitation, is prohibited. e. Existing monitoring wells located on the property shall not be abandoned or closed without the approval of the EPA or IDNR. f. Any new construction of enclosed buildings at the property must prevent, or include remedial systems to control and/or abate, vapor intrusion of Contaminants of Concern into any such new construction at the property, if necessary for compliance with published standards for protectiveness of human health and the environment. Such systems must be properly operated and maintained. Contaminants of Concern at the site include:  polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), including naphthalene, benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene (BETX).
g. Any person undertaking excavation or construction activities that may disturb soil at the property more than six feet below the surface grade shall provide no less than 30 days' advance written notice thereof to the EPA. Such excavation or construction shall not proceed without prior written approval by the agency, unless the excavation or construction is part of an Environmental Response Project that has been approved by the agency. Such notice and approval is not required for exigent circumstances, in which case notice must be given as soon as possible. h. If at the time of their ownership or occupancy an owner, tenant or occupant observes or is given notice that some other party, including but not limited to a utility easement holder, is, without EPA approval, undertaking either emergency or non-exigent excavation or construction activities more than six feet below the surface grade, said owner, tenant or occupant shall (i) promptly provide a copy to such other party engaged in such activities of these Activity and Use Limitations; (ii) promptly notify such other party that all appropriate and necessary assessments and precautions should be taken prior to such activities including, but not limited to, employee protection and hazardous substance management; (iii) promptly notify EPA of the other party's activity or planned activity and contact information for such other party; and (iv) promptly notify such other party that the materials generated at or from the excavation or construction activities must be properly managed as may be required by law, making all appropriate and necessary assessment prior to such management. The covenant on the second of two pieces of the site property owned by the Iowa Department of Transportation is document number 201900013313 recorded with the Dubuque County Recorder on 10/29/2019 includes the following activity and use limitations: a. Owners of the property must notify all occupants or tenants of this property, and any subsequent transferee of an interest in the property, of these Activity and Use Limitations and must condition all occupancy and tenancy of the property with compliance with these Activity and Use Limitations. The Holder identified herein has executed this Covenant and is bound by such Activity and Use Limitations without further notice. Failure by any tenant or occupant to comply with these Activity and Use Limitations does not excuse compliance by the then existing owner with these Activity and Use Limitations. b. The property must not be used for any purpose other than commercial, industrial or any and all highway or transportation purposes and matters relating thereto. c. The property must not be used for residential use or use where children may be present for extended periods of time, including school or day care. d. Except for monitoring wells authorized by EPA or IDNR, installation and/or use of wells for any purpose whatsoever, including but not limited to potable and non-potable water supply, for human or animal consumption, irrigation, heat pumps or sanitation, is prohibited. e. Existing monitoring wells located on the property must not be abandoned or closed without the approval of the EPA or IDNR. f. Any new construction of enclosed buildings at the property must prevent, or include remedial systems, to control and/or abate vapor intrusion of Contaminants of Concern into any such new construction at the Property, if necessary for compliance with published standards for protectiveness of human health and the environment. Such systems must be properly operated and maintained. Contaminants of Concern at the property include polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), including naphthalene, benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene and xylene (BETX). g. Any person undertaking excavation of construction activities that may disturb soil at the property more than 6 feet below the surface grade must provide no less than 30 days' advance written notice thereof to the EPA. Such excavation or construction must not proceed without prior written approval by the Agency, unless the excavation or construction is part of an Environmental Response Project that has been approved by the Agency. Such notice and approval are not required for emergency circumstances, in which case notice must be given as soon as possible. h. If at the time of their ownership, tenancy or occupancy, an owner, tenant or occupant observes or is given notice that some other party, including without limitation a utility easement holder, is, without EPA approval, undertaking either emergency or nonemergency excavation or construction activities more than 6 feet below the surface grade, said owner, tenant or occupant must (i) promptly provide a copy of these Activity and Use Limitations to such other party engaged in such activities; (ii) promptly notify such other party that all appropriate and necessary assessments and precautions should be taken prior to such activities, including without limitation employee protection and hazardous substance management; (iii) promptly notify EPA of the other party's activity or planned activity and contact information for such other party; and (iv) promptly notify such other party that the materials generated at or from the excavation or construction activities must be properly managed as may be required by law, making all appropriate and necessary assessment prior to such management.
Emergency Response and Removal
Cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. 6,850 cubic yards of contaminated soil and wastes were removed and incinerated.
