Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Mason City Coal Gasification Plant (Site) operated from 1900 to 1951. The site is located in downtown Mason City, with streets as boundaries on three sides and Willow Creek forming the fourth boundary. It is the location of a former manufactured gas plant, which generated "town gas" for lighting and heating purposes for the Mason City area, beginning in the early 1900's. The plant was decommissioned and subsequently demolished in 1952, following the availability of natural gas. The contaminants of concern (COCs) are polynuclear ﻿aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and a group of four volatile organic compounds (VOCs): benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes (BTEX). The site contamination was discovered in 1984 when the city was installing a sewer line on the property and they uncovered oily sludges in subsurface soil. Further investigation by the owner found three underground storage tanks containing the oily sludge. The tanks and stockpiled soil on site were exhumed, stored, and covered with a membrane cap on site. The contaminated soil and stockpiled soil were later excavated to the bedrock surface, thermally desorbed off site, and placed back into the excavation during a non-time critical Removal Action in 1994. The remedy selected in the Record of Decision for the site included monitored natural attenuation of groundwater and the implementation of institutional controls. The site was listed on the National Priorities List in 1994. Presently, an electrical substation and small storage garage are on site. Environmental covenants place restrictions on the property to address future exposures to vapor intrusion (VI), groundwater, and residual contamination remaining in the subsurface. The Fourth Five-Year Review was completed in 2023. The remedy is currently protective of human health and the environment. The next Five-Year Review will be completed in 2028. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Following discovery of the contamination during construction of the sewer line, Interstate Power and Light Company entered into multiple Administrative Orders on Consent with the EPA that resulted in the completion of a remedial investigation and feasibility study. They also conducted a removal action to address soil contamination. The removal action was completed in 1996 when over 21,000 tons of contaminated soil were excavated and thermally treated off-site. The treated soil was returned to the site to backfill the area excavated. The remedial investigation and feasibility study was concluded in September 2000 when the EPA selected a remedy for the site in a Record of Decision . The selected remedy is monitored natural attenuation of groundwater with institutional controls . Natural attenuation describes a variety of in-place processes that, under favorable conditions, act without human intervention to reduce the mass, toxicity, mobility, volume or concentration of contaminants in groundwater. A contingency remedy was selected if at some point in the future the monitoring data indicate that monitoried natural attenuation of groundwater is no longer effective in remediating the groundwater contaminants at the site. The contingency remedy is groundwater pumping and treatment with discharge to the sanitary sewer and implementation of institutional controls. On September 3, 2008, an Explanation of Significant Differences was signed which modified the ROD. The modifications made included changing the groundwater action level for dibenz(a,h)anthracene from 0.3 µg/L to 0.033µg/L; adding naphthalene and 2-methylnaphthalene as COCs in groundwater and establishing action levels of 1.4 µg/L for naphthalene and 63 µg/L for 2-methylnaphthalene; and adding limitations to the ICs to prevent exposure to potential vapor intrusion into buildings.
Interstate Power and Light Company, Kansas City Power & Light Company and the city of Mason City, Iowa, entered into a consent decree on July 29, 2002, to perform the cleanup of the site.The site is being addressed through actions undertaken by Interstate Power under EPA oversight.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Groundwater is monitored annually. Collection of monitored natural attenuation, parameters and natural attenuation modeling were discontinued in 2013 when it was demonstrated that the concentrations of contaminants along the flow path had decreased to such low levels that they limited the predictive capability of the model. Contaminant concentration trends are analyzed statistically using ordinary least squares regression analysis, and the Mann-Kendall and Theil-Sen tests. During the most recent evaluation, decreasing or stable trends for all contaminants were identified in the water table aquifer monitoring wells that were evaluated. In the intermediate aquifer, increasing trends were identified for benzene and benzo(a)anthracene. Additional wells have been installed to determine the extent of contamination in that zone. This evaluation was completed in March 2022. Initial sampling following the installation of these new wells has found dense non aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) and benzene in those wells and it is likely that groundwater flow in the intermediate zone is not as previously thought in the conceptual site model. Additional investigation of sediment in Willow Creek is planned. A DNAPL pump has been installed to remove DNAPL found in one well. The pump operates 1 minute per week. A﻿dditional investigation and well installation are in progress to delineate the extent of the DNAPL and benzene. DNAPL and benzene sampling of the new wells were conducted between October 2021 and December 2021. The findings were included in the annual report submitted in March 2022. The findings concerning the technical impracticability waiver were included in the April 2023 FYR. The most recent Five-Year Review completed in April 2023 details Issues and Recommendations: 
Issue﻿
Recommendation﻿
Milestone Date﻿
Benzene was not detected in the 2021 groundwater sample collected from MW-8R, but concentrations in the three sampling events prior exceeded the groundwater cleanup standard by more than an order of magnitude.
Due to the significant concentration fluctuations in MW-8/MW-8R, additional source control measures or ORC® Advanced injections should be considered to prevent further benzene migration and to decrease benzene concentrations over time.
12/31/2023
DNAPL extraction efforts appear to be limited in their ability to control continuing contaminant contributions to groundwater, and do not appear to be sufficient to support MNA achievement of groundwater cleanup levels.
DNAPL destruction should be considered to further limit these contributions and expedite the MNA remedy to achieve groundwater cleanup standards. Additional data collection is needed to assess the current DNAPL extraction configuration. And continued groundwater monitoring is necessary until all samples meet the groundwater cleanup standards defined in the CD.
﻿12/31/2023
The action level for 2-methylnaphthalene poses an unacceptable non-cancer hazard quotient of 1.75 to a child resident. An MCL is not available for this compound.
The 2-methylnapthalene action level should be revised to ensure long-term protectiveness of the remedy.
﻿12/31/2023
   Additional Findings were also noted during the Five-Year Review, but do not affect current and/or future protectiveness. More information can be found here. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
An environmental covenant has been placed on each of the two parcels of property that comprise the site, each with the following activity and use limitations: Restrict installation of groundwater wells and groundwater use; restrict residential use; and prevent potential vapor intrusion.  The covenant on the parcel of property owned by Interstate Power is document number 2008-7559, filed with the Cerro Gordo County Recorder on October 23, 2008. The covenant on the parcel of property owned by the city of Mason City is document number 2009-2974, filed with the Cerro Gordo County Recorder on April 24, 2009. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Sampling and monitoring continues at the site annually. An annual report is submitted towards the end of each year.
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In 1988, the potentially responsible parties (PRPs) excavated waste from three underground storage tanks and surrounding contaminated soil, moved them to another area of the site, and covered them with a membrane cap. PRPs completed excavation and thermal treatment of the soil and waste pile in 1996. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Interstate Power Company signed an Administrative Order on Consent with the EPA in 1991. Under this Order, Interstate Power Company agreed to determine the extent of contamination at the site and assist the EPA in evaluating cleanup options. In 1995, Interstate Power Company, Kansas City Power & Light Company, Bob McKiness Grading and Excavating, Inc., and Mason City signed an Administrative Order on Consent with the EPA for removal of source materials and post-removal groundwater monitoring. Interstate Power and Light Company, Kansas City Power & Light Company and the city of Mason City entered into a Consent Decree for the remedial design and remedial action in 2002. Top of Page