CENTRAL ILLINOIS PUBLIC SERVICE CO.TAYLORVILLE, IL 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 1-acre Central Illinois Public Service Company (Ameren CIPS) site is located at 917 south Webster Street in Taylorville, Illinois. A manufactured gas plant operated at the site from 1892 until 1932. The coal gasification process produced a byproduct called coal tar. Coal tar is a mixture of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) such as benzene as well as a class of compounds known as polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which include compounds such as naphthalene and benzo(a)pyrene. As a result of the operations, coal tar contaminated the soil, groundwater, surface water and sediments around the site. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Site is currently being remediated under the oversight of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) in consultation with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). The Site was added to the National Priorities List (NPL) in the Federal Register on August 30, 1990. In 1992, a Record of Decision (ROD) (USEPA 1992) was put in place for the Site requiring remediation of impacted groundwater at the Site. Remedial actions have included excavation of soil and sediment, in-situ chemical oxidation (ISCO) of secondary sources, and the installation of a pump & treat (P&T) groundwater remediation system at the Site.  Major elements of the remedy occurred after the 1992 decision by Illinois EPA to issue a Record of Decision (ROD) on the site. The major cleanup efforts included: 
Digging up contaminated soil down to the water table and sediments in the drainage swale; 
Restoring excavated areas; constructing an on-site groundwater pump and treat (P&T) system, and 
Providing permanent alternative water supply to approximately 20 affected residents in 1987
Placing restrictions on future use of the site property. 
The Illinois EPA executed a Consent Decree with Ameren in March 1994, under which Ameren agreed to perform the Remedial Design/Remedial Action (RD/RA) for the site. Illinois EPA oversees the RD/RA[BL1]. The CIPS site has been in the monitoring phase since 1995, and the pump & treat (P&T) system has been in effect since then. Regular operation and maintenance (O&M) activities remain and are on-going. The Illinois EPA and Ameren are considering remedial alternatives to finish cleanup of the site using a pump and treat system to address contaminated groundwater. The existing P&T system, while effectively removing most of the groundwater contamination, would take an estimated 100 years or longer to meet the Illinois Groundwater Quality Standards. For this reason, the Illinois EPA is proposing additional remedial action to render the site usable in a more reasonable timeframe. The current preferred remedial alternative, pending public comment, is in situ solidification and stabilization (ISS). After ISS is complete, the top 10 feet of ISS-mixed materials within the treated area will be excavated, properly disposed, and backfilled. Environmental monitoring to ensure protection of the public will occur during remedy implementation.  Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents.  EPA is conducting the sixth fifth five-year review of the site. The Superfund law requires regular checkups of sites that have been cleaned up – with waste managed on-site – to make sure the cleanup continues to protect people and the environment. Currently, the Illinois EPA and Ameren are considering new remedial alternatives to finish cleanup of the site and implemented a treatability study for in situ solidification and stabilization (ISS). For ISS, a slurry mixture of binding agents is developed and mixed with subsurface soil using large diameter augers. The existing P&T system, while effectively removing most of the groundwater contamination, would take an estimated 100 years or longer to meet the Illinois Groundwater Quality Standards. For this reason, the Illinois EPA is proposing ISS as the preferred remedial alternative to render the site usable in a more reasonable timeframe. For more information on the multiple alternatives considered, see the Focused Feasibility Study (pdf) (12.8MB) (About PDF) For more details on the specific rationale for selection of ISS see the Illinois EPA’s Proposed Plan (pdf) (1.89MB) (About PDF). Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Beginning in January 1987, Ameren conducted a removal action at the Site. Under Illinois EPA’s oversight, the PRPs cleaned up approximately 12,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil down to the water table and sediments in the drainage swale. The excavated area was backfilled and regraded and resurfaced them with gravel or vegetation. Ameren also implemented a groundwater and surface water/pond monitoring program. In addition, a permanent alternative water supply was provided to approximately 20 residents and plugged and abandoned associated private drinking water wells. Top of Page