FISHER-CALOLA PORTE, IN
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Fisher-Calo site is in Kingsbury Industrial Park, off Hupp Road, in LaPorte County, Indiana. An industrial chemical processing and distribution facility operated on site. The facility is in an area that previously housed the Kingsbury Ordnance Plant; a U.S. government installation used to manufacture military ordnance. After the installation closed, Fisher-Calo and various subsidiaries began operations at KIDP in the early 1970s. The site includes three properties; the One Line Road property, the adjacent Two-Line Road property, and the Space Leasing Area which was used for illegal disposal of waste materials. Facility operations contaminated soil and groundwater with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and volatile organic compounds.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site was listed on the National Priorities List, or NPL, in September of 1983. A remedial investigation and feasibility study took place from 1986 to 1990. The cleanup plan for the site was issued the 1990 Record of Decision and was later revised in the 1997 ROD amendment and the 2022 Explanation of Significant Differences (PDF) (36 pp, 13.16 MB). The site’s long-term cleanup included the excavating and disposing of buried drums and PCB-contaminated soils, extracting soil vapor, and pumping and treating groundwater. Construction of the remedy took place between 1994 and 1998. The groundwater extraction and treatment system were constructed in 1997 and began operating to treat VOCs in February 1998.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site has been addressed through federal, state, and potentially responsible parties (PRPs) actions. Many site cleanup milestones have already been achieved. Operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. EPA is conducting the sixth five-year review of the site to verify the remedy continues to protect people and the environment. The review is scheduled to be completed in August 2025. The five-year review is an opportunity for the public to tell EPA about site conditions and any concerns they may have. If you would like to share comments, please contact the Remedial Project Manager listed on this website. The previous review performed in 2020 concluded that the protectiveness of the remedy at the site could not be made at that time until additional information was obtained by completing a vapor intrusion study. In December of 2023, after a vapor intrusion assessment, EPA issued an addendum to the fifth five-year review (PDF) (374 pp, 29.39 MB) determining that site is protective of human health and the environment because there is no known exposure pathway to Site-related contaminants of concern at this time. However, the review found that for the remedy to be protective in the long-term several actions need to be taken to ensure protectiveness, including:
EPA and IDEM reviewing and approving an updated Operations & Maintenance Plan that requires periodic vapor intrusion sampling.
Applying activities set in the approved Institutional Control, including developing and implementing Long-Term Stewardship Plan.  
Modifying remedy decision documents to include Institutional Control requirements, along with addressing Vapor Intrusion issues if needed.
Modifying remedy decision documents to include Remedial Action Objectives.
