Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 6-acre Envirochem Corporation site is located west of Northside Sanitary Landfill and north of Zionsville in Boone County, Indiana. The facility processed and reclaimed solvents on site from 1977 to 1982. The facility received wastes such as resins, paint sludges, waste oils and flammable solvents and stored them on site in drums and storage tanks. On-site accumulation and unauthorized discharge of contaminated stormwater, poor management of drum inventory, unapproved burning of chlorinated hydrocarbons and other solvents, and several spills contaminated soils and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. Following immediate actions to protect human health and the environment, the site’s long-term cleanup is ongoing. The long-term remedy includes a permanent cap over the site and groundwater pumping and treatment. EPA updated the remedy in 1991 to include soil vapor extraction (SVE) rather than groundwater collection and treatment. Construction of the remedy took place in 1998. EPA updated the remedy again in 2006, reflecting the need for additional cleanup work. This work included SVE system enhancements to treat faster-moving contaminants and a barrier wall and treatment unit called a Permeable Reactive Gate System (PRGS) for slower-moving contaminants.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA issued a Record of Decision (110 pp, 6.45 MB) (“ROD”) on September 25, 1987, selecting a combined remedy for the site and the adjacent Northside Sanitary Landfill site. The ROD provided for a low-permeability cover system over the contaminated areas and a groundwater extraction and treatment system. Based on a treatability study performed by the PRPs, EPA and IDEM, it was later determined that it would be feasible and preferable to actively treat the contaminant source at the site, rather than simply containing these materials as provided for in the 1987 ROD. Therefore, EPA issued an Amended ROD in June 1991, establishing separate, complementary remedial approaches for the Envirochem and Northside sites. The 1987 ROD remedial action objectives include the following: preventing direct contact, inhalation, and ingestion of contaminated soils, landfill contents, groundwater, leachate, and sediment; reducing infiltration; enhancing the soil vapor extraction system; controlling migration of contaminants to groundwater, surface water and sediments; and removing and destroying volatile organic compounds and selected base neutral/acid organics from the soils. As amended, the ROD for the site required:
Access Restrictions.
Soil vapor extraction ("SVE.
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”) Compliant Cap and Surface Controls.
Contingent Groundwater Treatment.
Monitoring of leachate, groundwater, surface water, and sediments.
The objectives of the cap are to prevent direct contact with contaminated soils, reduce infiltration, and enhance the soil vapor extraction system. The objective of the soil vapor extraction activity is to remove and destroy VOCs and selected base neutral/acid organics from the soils. Since 1991, the PRPs have, under EPA and IDEM supervision conducted a Supplemental Investigation to collect groundwater; obtained the necessary access agreements with the site owners to permit cleanup of contaminated areas and support activities on adjacent property; completed site preparation work; secured, inventoried, analyzed and removed drums of contaminated material that had accumulated on-site during previous investigations and response activities; and submitted a draft remedial design. While the PRPs began designing and implementing the final remedy for the site under EPA and IDEM oversight, newly developed information persuaded EPA and IDEM that certain technical modifications and improvements to the selected remedy were appropriate. An Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) (22 pp, 1.22 MB) was issued in 1997. It was required because the remedial action to be taken differed significantly from the remedy selected in the ROD, although it did not fundamentally alter that remedy with respect to scope, performance or cost. The Consent Decree and accompanying documents were modified to reflect the remedy changes described in the ESD. The ESD addressed several issues based on the new information obtained:
Nine additional organic compounds in site groundwater that had not been previously identified were recognized.
The water table at the southern end of the site was higher than it was during the SVE pilot test conducted in 1987, which could hamper the effectiveness of SVE in that area.
Contamination was encountered to the west of the approximate western site boundary identified in the ROD and the Consent Decree.
Research of new SVE technologies in preparing the design presented additional complexities.
New data indicated that the organic carbon content of site soils was generally higher than was assumed in the model used to set soil cleanup levels in the ROD Amendment. Since cleanup standards were going to be revised, EPA and IDEM also agreed to add a minor change in the cleanup standard for 1,1-dichloroethane ("DCA"). Since that time, a general scientific consensus has developed that concludes DCA does not pose the level of cancer risk previously believed. For more information, see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry’s toxicological profile for DCA available online at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp133.html.  As a result, the risk calculation and cleanup standard for DCA were re-calculated to reflect this information.

What Is the Current Site Status?
Since 2003, EPA has conducted five (5) Five-Year Reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The fifth review, completed in 2023, concluded that the remedy selected by EPA continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. However, operation of the enhanced Soil Vapor Extraction, or SVE, system has not significantly reduced the levels of contaminants in groundwater. Testing found the Permeable Reactive Gate System, or PRGS, was not able to treat water properly. The fifth FYR identified issues with potential remedy failure, contamination remaining underground as a potential source for groundwater contamination, groundwater monitoring, and institutional controls. The site’s 2023 five-year review recommended that the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) complete additional evaluations and propose additional remedial measures. An evaluation of additional remedial alternatives is ongoing and may lead to modifications to the remedy and Consent Decree to assure long-term protectiveness and compliance with cleanup objectives.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
 EPA is the lead agency in partnership with the Indiana Department of Environmental Management overseeing the PRPs’ cleanup of the site. Institutional controls are in place and effective. EPA will review institutional controls once final remedy elements are in place.

Emergency Response and Removal
Cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. Actions in 1983 and 1984 removed and treated wastes, tanks, drums, piping, treating water and contaminated soils, capped the site and a holding pond, and fenced the site. In 1985, EPA installed a sump and collected over 20,000 gallons of contaminated groundwater. The entire area was then covered with soil and seeded; drainage channels were set up to control rainwater that runs onto the site.

Enforcement Information
EPA and IDEM have jointly overseen cleanup activities at the site under authority of CERCLA.  EPA and IDEM entered into a consent decree with certain PRPs who agreed to perform the final remedy for the site. That Consent Decree (155 pp, 5.16 MB) was approved by the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Indiana on September 10, 1991. The Consent Decree (and subsequent modifications) requires those PRPs to implement elements of the remedy selected by EPA – with IDEM's concurrence – in a September 25, 1987 ROD(PDF)(110 pp, 6.2MB, About PDF), a June 7, 1991 ROD Amendment(PDF)(21 pp, 993 K, About PDF) and a 2006 Explanation of Significant Differences(PDF)(18 pp, 1.5MB, About PDF).
