NORTHSIDE SANITARY LANDFILL, INCZIONSVILLE, IN
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Northside Sanitary Landfill site is located near Zionsville in Boone County, Indiana. The site covers about 65 acres of a larger, 180-acre parcel. Over 16 million gallons of hazardous wastes were deposited in the landfill from the 1950s to the 1980s, leading to soil and groundwater contamination. Following cleanup, the site’s long-term remedy is in place. Operation and maintenance activities are ongoing.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions.EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Continued protectiveness of the remedy requires ongoing operation and maintenance activities and putting institutional controls in place.

What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy includes a hazardous waste cap with gas venting, a hydraulic isolation wall on the south and west sides of the landfill, leachate and on-site groundwater collection with off-site treatment and disposal, fencing, and groundwater and leachate monitoring. Remedy construction took place from 1994 to 1996. EPA updated the site’s remedy in 2009 to include the completion, operation and maintenance of an on-site constructed wetland treatment system. Operation and maintenance activities are ongoing.  A five year review in April 2019 concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Another five year review was completed in April 2024 and concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The Site landfill contains a variety of municipal and industrial wastes which include hazardous wates materials.  The Site groundwater monitoring has histroically found detections of inorganics and volatile organic compounds (VOC), with the metal iron and the VOC benzene beign contaminants of concern. http://www.epa.gov/region5superfund/fiveyear/reviews_pdf/indiana/northside-sanitary-ldfl-328379.pdf
