LANE STREET GROUND WATER CONTAMINATIONELKHART, IN
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Lane Street Ground Water Contamination site is located in Elkhart, Indiana. The site includes a plume of contaminated groundwater from an unidentified source that extends toward the south from an industrial park, under County Road 6, to a residential area along Lane Street. The contamination includes trichloroethylene (TCE) and other chlorinated solvents. Following immediate actions to protect human health and the environment, site investigations and cleanup planning are ongoing.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Cleanup has included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In 2007, EPA provided water filtration systems to about 13 homes whose wells were either contaminated or located near contaminated wells, and the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) provided bottled water to these residents. After further investigation of the contamination, EPA connected 26 homes on Lane Street and adjoining streets to the public water supply system. EPA completed this work in November 2008. Other homes on Lane Street were already connected to the public water supply system.
What Is the Current Site Status?
In 2016, EPA signed a Record of Decision (ROD) and selected enhanced bioremediation to clean up groundwater at the site. Bioremediation is the use of microbes—that live naturally in the environment—to clean up contaminated soil and groundwater. At this site, EPA will create conditions favorable for organisms who can process trichloroethene (TCE) and other contaminants of concern into harmless compounds, including ethane and ethene. You can read more about bioremediation in EPA’s “A Citizen’s Guide to Bioremediation,” linked below. Negotiations began for a consent decree for the Potentially Responsible Party (PRP) to perform work at the site. As a result of the negotiations, an Administrative Order on Consent (AOC) was proposed. In 2019, EPA and the PRP reached a settlement agreement that would provide funds to EPA to complete the work required at the site, as determined in the 2016 ROD. The settlement agreement was signed in late 2022 and was finalized in early 2023. EPA is now conducting a remedial design investigation to select the best bioremediation approach to clean up the groundwater at the site. A Citizen's Guide to Bioremediation
