Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Keystone Corridor Ground Water Contamination site is in Indianapolis, Indiana. The site consists of the Fall Creek well field and potential sources of the groundwater contamination. The groundwater has been affected by an approximately 4,500 foot long by 1,500-foot wide plume (or underground mass) contaminated with chlorinated solvents (or CVOCs, liquids that dissolve other substances) located near the intersection of East Fall Creek Parkway North Drive and Keystone Avenue. The groundwater plume consists of chlorinated organic compounds (CVOCs), including tetrachloroethene (PCE),  trichloroethene (TCE), cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2-DCE), which is a breakdown product of PCE and TCE, and vinyl chloride. More information: 
Site Map (PDF) (1 pp, 603.36 K, About PDF)
Superfund Groundwater Introduction
Learn about vapor intrusion
What Are the Risks at the Site? 
In 1989, elevated levels of CVOCs were found in soil near the former Tuchman Cleaners property at 4401 North Keystone Avenue. From 1953 until 2008, the dry cleaner operation used and released PCE, generating PCE waste at the property. Indiana Department of Environmental Management, or IDEM, investigated soil and groundwater contamination near the property. The site owner also conducted some cleanup work from 2003 to 2006, however, the Tuchman property remained contaminated. When the Tuchman Cleaners’ parent company declared bankruptcy in 2008, all cleanup efforts at the site stopped. From 2009 to 2011, IDEM investigated the Tuchman site and surrounding properties further. IDEM found elevated levels of PCE and TCE in groundwater and soil. The City of Indianapolis oversaw the demolition of the Tuchman Cleaners building in November 2011 and IDEM asked for EPA’s help to finish the cleanup. A site assessment (PDF) (76 pp, 6.1MB, About PDF) was conducted in 2012 and cleanup at Tuchman Cleaners began. IDEM also investigated the nearby former Vantage Point Cleaners property, which operated as a dry cleaner from 1986 to 1997 using and disposing of PCE waste. IDEM’s investigation showed elevated levels of PCE in the groundwater on the property. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal and state actions. Several site cleanup milestones have already been achieved. To clean up the chemicals released into the soil and underground water supplies at the Tuchman Cleaners property, in September 2012, EPA conducted a time-critical removal action. (EPA calls the cleanup a time-critical removal action because the pollution posed an imminent threat to people.) The cleanup included removing soil that posed a direct contact threat (danger from touching the soil); backfilling excavated areas; and transportation and disposal of hazardous material off-site. In addition, EPA checked nearby residential properties for gases seeping into buildings through cracks and holes in their foundations. These gases can cause unsafe indoor air pollution through a process known as vapor intrusion. EPA installed vapor intrusion mitigation systems at buildings where gasses had accumulated to unsafe levels to deal with the problem. A Hazard Ranking System, or HRS, report, completed in May 2013 by EPA, identified impacts to the City of Indianapolis’ well field. The HRS report identified the following six properties as having historical releases of contamination: Tuchman Cleaners, Thomas Caterers of Distinction, Vantage Point Cleaners, Purtee Plating, Lumberman’s Wholesale Supply, and Imperial Cleaners. In December 2013, the Keystone Corridor site was placed on the Superfund Program’s National Priorities List, or NPL, mainly in response to the contaminated municipal drinking water well that was removed from service in 2011. In 2016 EPA conducted groundwater, soil and air sampling as part of the site’s cleanup investigation. The investigation helped EPA determine the sources of the contamination and identify appropriate long-term measures for ground water cleanup. Vapor Intrusion (OU3)
EPA has been inspecting and testing area homes since 2012 and installed 36 VIMS to-date. EPA continues to work with affected residents and businesses to address vapor intrusion concerns. In September 2018, EPA issued its Record of Decision (ROD) Interim Remedial Action (PDF) (200pp,62.59MB, About PDF) documenting the interim cleanup plan to address vapor intrusion throughout the site – referred to as Operable Unit 3, or OU3, of the Keystone Corridor site. The selected remedy for OU3 includes the following major components: 
Installation of vapor intrusion mitigation systems
Operation and maintenance of active vapor intrusion mitigation systems until vapor mitigation is no longer needed
Institutional controls (ICs) within the vapor intrusion area of concern 
In 2019, EPA wrote up the remedial design to specify how the remedy would be constructed: Conceptual Performance-Based Vapor Intrusion Mitigation System - Remedial Design (PDF) (116 pp, 9.08MB, About PDF) In February 2020, EPA began the remedial action which consisted of construction of vapor intrusion mitigation systems at the eight known industrial and commercial buildings and up to an estimated 88 additional buildings (44 residential and 44 industrial/commercial) consistent with the remedial design. In February 2022, EPA issued an Explanation of Significant Differences document announcing two significant changes to the selected interim remedy for vapor intrusion at OU3: 
The addition of chloroform as a contaminant of concern
The inclusion in the OU-3 remedial action of vapor intrusion mitigation systems previously installed at impacted properties through earlier removal actions to make sure they are also part of post-installation operation and maintenance (O&M) requirements.
Explanation of Significant Differences (PDF) (16 pp, 808.22 K, About PDF) 
Source Groundwater Contamination (OU1)
EPA issued its Record of Decision (PDF) (102pp, 10.26KB K, About PDF) in 2020 to address the primary source area of contamination known as Operable Unit 1 (OU1) at the Keystone Corridor Ground Water Contamination Superfund site. EPA’s selected remedy for OU1 is to apply energy (heat or steam) underground to mobilize, vaporize, capture, and treat the contaminants, which is called in-situ thermal treatment. The main source of groundwater contamination has resulted in soil vapor contamination at the site. A Citizen’s Guide to In Situ Thermal Treatment (PDF) (2﻿ pp, 587.14 K, About PDF)
Frequently Asked Questions about EPA's Proposed Cleanup of the Keystone Corridor Ground Water Contamination Superfund Site, Operable Unit 1 (PDF) (4﻿pp, 126 K, About PDF) 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Vapor Intrusion (OU3)
EPA continues outreach and installation of vapor mitigation systems at homes and businesses in the area affected by the groundwater plume. Source Area Contamination and Groundwater (OU1) EPA has prepared a remedial design for the in-situ thermal remedy at the source area and is currently planning the remedial action. EPA is also working to obtain access at the source area property, which is necessary to construct the remedy. The agency is also monitoring the groundwater plume to ensure it doesn’t impact additional properties or drinking water wells. EPA continues to engage with area stakeholders, including IDEM, the source area property owner, affected residents and businesses, the Marion County Health Department, and the local drinking water technical advisory group. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Reports on sampling events and other environmental data can be found in the following documents: CH2M Hill - Vapor Intrusion Results(15pp, 244K, About PDF) CH2M HILL Technical Memo - Expedited Vapor Intrusion Evaluation & Estimation of Potential Human Health Risks(107pp, 4.3MB, About PDF) Additional sampling documents can be viewed online in the EPA's Administrative Records Collection for the  Keystone Corridor Groundwater Contamination site. Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
From September 2012 to December 2014, EPA conducted a time-critical removal action at the former industrial dry-cleaning facility called Tuchman Cleaners under the Superfund Emergency Response Program. EPA excavated over 2,550 tons of contaminated soil and two underground storage tanks from the property. EPA also sampled soil vapor in the residential neighborhood to the east and conducted testing at more than 40 residential properties to determine if vapor intrusion was occurring. 
As a result, during the removal action EPA installed vapor mitigation systems at 22 residential properties where vapor intrusion was found to be occurring. EPA recognized that VOCs would continue to threaten the Fall Creek Station municipal well field and, therefore, a long-term response action was needed under the Superfund Remedial Program. 
Tuchman Cleaners Removal Action Administrative Record
Tuchman Cleaners Removal Action Special Collection Documents 
In 2017 the Agency conducted a time-critical removal action which included:  performing vapor mitigation at properties where relevant indoor air action levels were exceeded in accordance with current EPA guidance; performing post-installation proficiency sampling 30 days, six months, and one year after mitigation system installation; and taking any other response actions that could pose an imminent and substantial endangerment to the public health or the environment. EPA’s Action Memorandum (PDF) (36pp, 6.33MB, About PDF) describes the actions that were planned. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
As a result of the above investigations, IDEM's state cleanup program held numerous discussions with potentially responsible parties (PRPs), including Tuchman Cleaners, Vantage Point Cleaners, Thomas Caterers, and Purtee Plating, regarding soils and groundwater contaminated with TCE and PCE. After the Tuchman Cleaners’ parent company declared bankruptcy in 2008 and the Fall Creek municipal drinking water well was found to be impacted, IDEM requested EPA's assistance with a removal action at Tuchman Cleaners. Under the authority of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA, commonly known as Superfund), the Superfund enforcement program gets sites cleaned up by finding the companies or people responsible for contamination at a site and negotiating with or ordering them to do the cleanup themselves, or to pay for the cleanup done by another party (i.e., EPA, state, or other responsible parties). In July 2014, EPA sent information requests, pursuant to Section 104(e) of CERCLA, to 23 current or past owners or operators at the properties connected to the contaminated groundwater plume. EPA’s policy does not consider owners or operators of property above a groundwater plume to be PRPs, absent evidence that the property owners or operators contributed to the site contamination. Seven potential source properties were initially identified, and EPA obtained access to sample six of them: the former Vantage Cleaners, the former Tuchman Cleaners, Thomas Catering, Purtee Plating, Lumberman’s Wholesalers, and S&K Laundry, which is located approximately 0.75 miles south of Tuchman Cleaners. The highest concentrations of PCE and TCE are present in the shallow aquifer north of Fall Creek near the Tuchman Cleaners property. EPA’s proposed remedy for OU1 seeks to address the primary source area contributing to soil vapors and groundwater contamination, with full remediation of the contaminated groundwater plume expected to be addressed later, in a final ROD for OU2. Should additional PRPs be identified, General Notice Letters and/or 104(e) Information Requests will be issued as appropriate. Top of Page