PLATING, INC.GREAT BEND, KS 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Plating Inc. site was a chromium and zinc plating facility at 8801 West Sixth Street in Great Bend, Kansas. The facility is situated within the airport industrial area in Barton County, 1.5 miles west of Great Bend and two miles north of the Arkansas River. The Kansas Department of Health and the Environment conducted a walkthrough of the facility on March 8, 2006 and an inspection on January 5, 2007. Based upon the findings of the inspection, the facility was closed. Approximately 6,400 gallons of chromic acid was noted on site, along with other acids and hydroxides. The concrete in the secondary containment was pitted and inadequate. Chromic acid was discharging onto a concrete pad outside the building, which, in turn, was discharging to the soils. A groundwater plume of hexavalent chromium, approximately two miles long, has impacted domestic wells and is moving toward Great Bend public water supply wells. The site consists of the former Plating, Inc. facility and the associated contaminated groundwater plume. The site also includes two abandoned settling basins, which historically received waste water discharges from the facility and other industries at the airport. These settling basins are located approximately one mile south of the facility. The site was placed on the National Priorities List in March 2008.﻿ The site is currently inactive. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 1998, the potentially responsible party (PRP) installed a shallow remedial well to control and remediate a contaminated groundwater plume (an underground mass of contaminated water). After determining the remedial well was not fully containing the plume, the PRP installed an additional remedial well in 2002.﻿ In 2006, the PRP filed for bankruptcy. The EPA conducted a Time-Critical Removal Action to remove the hazardous waste that was left behind. The KDHE worked with the EPA and its contractor to develop the Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study field sampling plan, which was implemented in February 2010. Two additional phases of Supplemental Field Investigations were completed in 2013 to adequately characterize the soil and groundwater contamination plume. Additional sampling of the source area, downgradient monitoring wells, and public and private wells was completed in 2016, 2017 and 2018. A Feasibility Study was completed in 2019 and a Record of Decision was completed in September 2020. A Remedial Design has been finalized, which required the removal of the former manufacturing building and the contaminated soil beneath it. The Remedial Action is now complete, and groundwater monitoring will begin in 2025. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The EPA has selected a long-term remedy for the site. The EPA has finalized the Remedial Investigation Report, the Feasibility Study, the Proposed Plan and Record of Decision (signed September 30, 2020) to address the source of the contamination beneath the on-site building. A public meeting was held on May 19, 2020 to discuss the proposed remedy. The selected remedy to remove the building and the contaminated soil beneath the building has been documented in a Record of Decision on September 30, 2020. A contract to design the remedy was awarded on July 17, 2021. The Remedial Design for the excavation and removal of the contaminated source area has been completed, and a contract to take down the old building and remove hazardous soil under the building has been completed. The removal action to take down the former Plating, Inc. building and remove the contaminated soil beneath the building has been completed. Rock has been placed on the site to be used as a lay-down yard, and groundwater monitoring of area monitoring wells will begin in 2025. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Currently there are no activity and use limitations.
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
The KDHE requested federal assistance from the EPA in January 2007. The EPA conducted a removal action, or short-term cleanup, in October 2007 to remove plating solutions. The EPA cut up and disposed of the tanks and drums containing plating solutions. Top of Page