FORMER UNITED ZINC & ASSOCIATED SMELTERSIOLA, KS 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
Iola, Kansas was the home of several zinc and lead smelting plants during the early 1900s. The United Zinc and East Iola smelters were located on the east side of town. The Lanyon smelters were located on the west edge of town. These plants were demolished long ago; however, the lead contamination these smelters distributed throughout the city of Iola still remains as a health risk. The EPA has a responsibility to address risks to human health and the environment posed by this contamination. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The EPA is responsible for addressing industrial releases of hazardous substances, such as, smelting releases, lead and other hazardous metals to the environment. The EPA conducted a time-critical removal of lead contaminated soils at 127 residential properties in 2006. A school yard was also cleaned up during this time. Sampling of residential soil continued after the 2006 removal ended. To date, nearly all residential soils within the Iola city limits have been tested. Careful consideration of the results led the EPA to resume cleanup work on the most contaminated properties. The second time critical removal of lead-contaminated soil began in August of 2015 and concluded in December 2017. 285 properties were cleaned up during this time. The EPA began a remedial action to address the remaining contaminated residential properties in the Spring of 2019. This effort is ongoing and is expected to be completed in the Fall of 2027. The EPA has sampled 2,955 properties in Iola, Kansas. Approximately 1,371 of these qualify for cleanup. As of December 31, 2024, 1,180 properties have been cleaned up leaving 191 properties awaiting cleanup. The current contract is scheduled to continue remediation work through 2027. This site is one of many across the country to receive funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which invested $3.5 billion in environmental remediation at Superfund sites on the National Priorities List. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding will be used to remove contaminated soil from residential properties. Top of Page