Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The A.L. Taylor (Valley of the Drums) Superfund site is located in Brooks, Kentucky. The 23-acre site is located in a rural area ten miles south of Louisville, Kentucky, near State Highway 1020 in Brooks, Bullitt County, Kentucky. The site includes 17-acres of wooded and grassy areas. A security fence encloses the remaining 6-acre-area. Site surroundings include wooded areas, private residences, Wilson Creek and a golf course. Some commercial businesses are also located nearby. The site includes an area used for waste disposal and drum recycling from 1967 to 1977. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the site on the National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983 because of contaminated groundwater, soil and surface water resulting from waste handling practices. EPA, the Kentucky Department for Environmental Protection (KDEP) and the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) investigated site conditions and took steps to clean up the site to protect people and the environment from contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. By monitoring groundwater, regularly inspecting the site, and conducting required Five-Year Reviews, EPA and KDEP continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
1967 thru 1975
The site owner used the site for a waste disposal operation from 1967 to 1977. 1975
The Kentucky Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Cabinet (KNREP, now KDEP) first documented releases of hazardous substances from the site in 1975 and pursued legal action against the site owner at that time. Contamination resulted from waste handling practices at the site. Between 1975 and 1981, the EPA and KDEP conducted investigations and identified contamination at the site. At that time, deteriorating and leaking drums at the site discharged contaminants into Wilson Creek. Contaminants including heavy metals, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), plastics, and Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) in groundwater, surface water, sediment and soil posed possible human health threats if ingestion or direct contact were to occur. 1979
In January 1979, at the request of KNREPC, the EPA conducted emergency response actions at the site to prevent the migration and future releases of contamination. Projects included: 
Constructing interceptor trenches and a temporary treatment system
Securing leaking drums
Segregating and organizing the drums on site. EPA recorded 17,051 remaining drums at the site, which included 11,629 empty drums.
EPA operated and maintained the on-site treatment system until December 1979, when KNREPC assumed responsibility for the system. 
1981 thru 1989
The EPA initially led site investigation and cleanup activities in cooperation with the Kentucky Department for Environmental Protection (KDEP). KDEP currently leads operation and maintenance and monitoring activities, in cooperation with the EPA. The EPA conducted four removal actions between 1981 and 1989 to remove the remaining drums on-site, upgrade the treatment system, regrade the ground to promote positive drainage and reduce the amount of ponded water and surface erosion. These actions removed drummed waste from the on-site ground surface but left contaminated soil and buried drums on site. In 1984, the EPA issued letters to site potentially responsible parties (PRPs) and the site owner for reimbursement of costs associated with investigations and removal actions. In 1987, the EPA installed the clay cap, perimeter drainage system, groundwater monitoring wells and security fence to address remaining soil contamination. In 1988 and 1989, The EPA reseeded and regraded the cap. After cleanup, the EPA removed the site from the NPL in 1996. 1996
After cleanup, the EPA removed the site from the NPL in 1996. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five-Year Review report published in 2023, is linked from the HQs site. The remedy at the Site currently protects human health and the environment in the short term due to regular O&M and the landfill cap being in good condition. The site’s long-term remedy include: 
moving ponded water from the site
installing a clay cap
installing a perimeter drainage system
installing and regular sampling of groundwater monitoring wells
installing security fencing to reduce the potential exposure pathway to onsite contamination. 
The EPA performed operation and maintenance activities at the site from September 1998 to February 1990. Since then, KDEP has performed these activities, which include groundwater monitoring and cap maintenance. There is no visual evidence that the cap is eroding or that contaminants under the cap are migrating toward Wilson Creek. Currently, no one drinks ground water at the site and there are no known recreational uses of Wilson Creek east of the landfill cap.
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Security fencing has been installed to reduce the potential exposure pathway to onsite contamination. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
In 1991, the EPA and the site’s PRPs signed a legal agreement to repay the EPA for the costs the Agency incurred during initial cleanup activities. The PRPs also agreed to provide funding to perform site monitoring, operation and maintenance work. EPA and KDEP continue to use this funding to support operation and maintenance activities and long-term monitoring of groundwater and Wilson Creek surface water and sediments.
Top of Page