RED PENN SANITATION CO. LANDFILLPEEWEE VALLEY, KY 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 151 acre Red Penn Sanitation Co. Landfill Superfund site is located in Peewee Valley, Kentucky. The site is located on Kentucky State Route 362 (Ash Avenue), 1.5 miles southeast of Pewee Valley in Oldham County, Kentucky. Vines, shrubs and trees cover the site. Floyds Fork Creek borders the site to the east and southeast. An unnamed creek tributary and Kentucky State Route 362 border the site to the southwest. Hawley Gibson Road borders the site to the northwest. People use creeks bordering the site for fishing, swimming and raising livestock. The site’s broader surroundings include agricultural and residential land uses. From 1954 to 1986, operations used an 85-acre area at the site for waste disposal and a 66-acre portion of the site as a borrow area. From 1968 to 1986, a 40-acre licensed landfill operated on site. In 1989, EPA listed the site on the NPL. Following cleanup activities, EPA deleted the site from the NPL in 2001. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989 because of contaminated groundwater, leachate, soil and surface water resulting from waste handling practices. EPA, the Kentucky Department for Environmental Protection (KDEP)Exitand the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) have investigated site conditions and taken steps to clean up the site in order to protect people and the environment from contamination. Following site investigations, EPA determined that site contamination does not pose a threat to people and the environment. By properly closing the landfill, EPA, KDEP and the site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination.  Currently, the site is not in use. The site can support commercial and residential land uses. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA led site investigation activities in cooperation with KDEP. 1986
Operators of the landfill removed 220 tons of drums and contaminated soil from the site.  Because the landfill operators never properly closed the landfill, EPA recommended that KDEP and the site’s PRPs place a cap over the landfill. 1989
EPA placed the site on the National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989 because of contaminated ground water, leachate, soil and surface water resulting from waste handling practices. 1999
The PRPs agreed to design and install the landfill cap, regrade the site, install a geosynthetic clay liner, place clean soil at the site, and revegetate and monitor the site. 2000
The PRPs completed construction of the landfill cap. 2001
EPA took the site off the NPL. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
in 2001, EPA took the site off the NPL.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
In 1986, KDEP negotiated legal agreements with Red Penn Sanitation Company, the landfill operators, to clean up drums and a waste pile at the landfill entrance. The EPA was unable to negotiate legal agreements with the site’s PRPs to investigate the site. EPA used federal funds for site investigation activities. EPA negotiated legal agreements with the PRPs to conduct landfill closure activities. The PRPs funded cleanup and monitoring activities.
Top of Page