Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 3.5-acre National Electric Coil Co./Cooper Industries Superfund site is located on Old Highway 119 next to the Cumberland River in Dayhoit, Harlan County, Kentucky. The site includes a main manufacturing building, two smaller buildings, an asphalt paved parking lot and a grass-covered riverbank area. A mobile home park borders the site to the south, a Kentucky Utility Company electrical substation borders the site to the north, Old Highway 119 borders the site to the west and the Cumberland River borders the site to the east. The residential communities bordering the site and south of the site are low-income areas. It includes the area where National Electric Coil Company operated a coal mining machinery repair facility from 1951 to 1987. From 1987 to 2010, another company operated a similar facility at the site. In 2010, automobile storage operations began at the site. The U.S Environmental Protection Agency placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1992 because of contaminated air, soil and groundwater resulting from coal mining machinery repair operations. EPA, the Kentucky Department for Environmental Protection (KDEP) and the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) have investigated conditions and taken steps to clean up the site in order to protect people and the environment from contamination. By treating and monitoring groundwater and conducting required Five-Year Reviews, EPA, KDEP and the site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. Since 1989, a water line has connected residences and businesses nearby to the public water supply. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
McGraw-Edison/Cooper, Treen Land Company and National Electric Coil Company, the site’s PRPs, lead site investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by EPA and KDEP. 1951 -1987
National Electric Coil Company operated a coal mining machinery repair facility under the ownership of the McGraw Edison Company. Operations included rewinding electric motors and manufacturing coils as well as rebuilding machinery used in the coal mining industry. Operations used chemicals to remove oil and tar from the used motors, capacitors, transformers and other equipment prior to rebuilding the equipment and discharged chemicals, wastes and contaminated transformer oils onto the ground and through a drainage pipe to the Cumberland River. 1985 - 1987
Cooper Industries purchased the McGraw Edison Company in 1985 and continued the facility’s operations until 1987, when Treen Land Company bought the site property. 1989
KDEP sampled the community and private drinking water wells surrounding the site. Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) were detected at concentrations that exceed safe drinking water standards in 12 of the wells. Homes were then connected to the public water supply system. 1990 – 1991
The site’s PRPs conducted interim cleanup activities, which included digging up and disposing of about 5,500 tons of contaminated soil. The excavated areas were backfilled with clean soil. 1992
The EPA listed the site on the NPL because of contaminated air, soil and groundwater resulting from coal mining machinery repair operations. 1993
The PRPs began preliminary groundwater pump-and-treat activities to minimize migration of contamination. The system used an activated carbon air stripper to treat contaminated groundwater. 1994
Charles Dozier owned the site from 1994 until 2010 and the coal mining machinery repair facility operated under the National Electric Services Management Group. 1996
EPA issued the site’s long-term cleanup plan. It included 
recovering contaminated groundwater from beneath the site and properties next to the site;
using an air stripper to treat contaminated groundwater;
treating contaminated gas from the air stripping operations; and
discharging treated groundwater to the Cumberland River. 
1997
EPA issued an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) to summarize a minor change to the cleanup plan. This added a trench to collect contamination in the shallow surface water and additional recovery wells. 2001
About 170 tons of contaminated soil was excavated and removed from the site. 2010
Jennifer Pennington owns the site and Pennington’s Wrecker Service operates on site. Operations include storage of wrecked automobiles on the asphalt parking lot next to the main building, storage of auto parts in on-site buildings and sale of salvage auto parts. Land use at the site is not expected to change soon. 2011
EPA revised the cleanup plan to include institutional controls to limit groundwater use and remove the treatment of gas from the air stripper. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The groundwater treatment system has been operating for 20 years. EPA completed its most recent Five-Year Review in 2023. It concluded that the protectiveness of the remedy could not be determined because the vapor intrusion pathway has not been evaluated. The groundwater pump-and-treat system continues to operate at the site. The site’s PRPs continue to conduct semi-annual groundwater monitoring. 
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
In 2011, EPA revised the cleanup plan to include institutional controls (ICs) for the site and three adjacent properties to prevent future users from exposure to contaminated groundwater until cleanup standards are met. ICs are currently in place for three of the four affected parcels. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Semi-annual groundwater monitoring is performed by the PRP’s contractors and documented in Semi-annual groundwater monitoring reports.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws. EPA negotiated legal agreements with the site’s PRPs to investigate and clean up the site. McGraw-Edison/Cooper continues to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities. Top of Page