Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Green Remediation
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Smith’s Farm Superfund Site is located in Brooks, Kentucky. It includes both an uncontrolled dump that received industrial waste from around the 1940s to the 1970s and an industrial landfill operated until 1989. The EPA placed Smith’s Farm on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1986 because of contaminated groundwater, sediment, soil and surface water resulting from waste disposal activities at the Site. The EPA, the Kentucky Department for Environmental Protection (KDEP)Exit, and the Site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) have investigated Site conditions. By removing thousands of drums of industrial waste, consolidating and capping remaining waste, operating a leachate collection and treatment system, and maintaining the landfill caps, and by conducting regular environmental sampling and Five-Year Reviews the EPA, KDEP and the Site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. 
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Site’s PRPs lead Site investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by the EPA and KDEP. During cleanup, a Site can be divided into a number of distinct areas depending on the complexity of the problems associated with the Site. These areas called operable units (OUs).  At Smith’s Farm, there are two OUs: 
OU-1: UNPERMITTED DRUM DISPOSAL AREA
OU-2: FORMERLY PERMITTED LANDFILL 
1984
At the request of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, the EPA completed the removal of several thousand drums from the unpermitted drum disposal area and surfaced the area with clay to address leachate problems. 1989 – 1991
The Site’s long-term remedy for OU-1, selected in 1989 and updated in 1991, included: 
digging up contaminated soil, surface drums, buried drums and fill material from the main OU-1 area of contamination
digging up contaminated sediments from the intermittent valley streams
constructing an 11-acre landfill at the main OU-1 area of contamination
treating the dug-up contaminated soil and sediments
properly disposing of soil and sediments on site, including treating soil and sediment if necessary, prior to disposal
installing retaining walls at the east and west toes of the hill that represents the main OU-1 area of contamination, and consolidating and contouring treated backfill and clean material in that area
installing leachate collection and conveyance lines in the new landfill
installing leachate collection tanks at the southernmost end of the new landfill
installing a cap and cover system on the new landfill
placing a perimeter fences with warning signs around the new landfill
land use restrictions
monitoring shallow groundwater for 30 years. 
1993
The site’s long-term remedy for OU-2 included: 
extinguishing belowground landfill fires, if necessary
installing a leachate collection system at the bedrock surface along the entire east and south sides of the landfill
installing a cap and cover system
installing perimeter fencing, lockable gates and warning signs
placing deed restrictions and water use restrictions
monitoring shallow groundwater and treatment plant effluent for 30 years. 
1995
The Site’s PRPs completed cleanup actions for OU-1 in 1995. Operation and maintenance activities began immediately thereafter. The cleanup activities resulted in the treatment of 21,000 cubic yards of contaminated soils and the construction of an 11-acre capped landfill with a leachate collection system. 1998
The Site’s PRPs completed cleanup actions for OU-2, resulting in the proper consolidation and capping of the 40-acre, formerly permitted landfill and the construction of a leachate treatment plant. Leachate collection tanks in OU-1 connect the influent feed to the leachate treatment plant. The connection eliminates the hauling of OU-1 leachate by truck to the OU-2 leachate treatment plant or to an off-site disposal facility. 2008
Parties found additional drums on Site. The PRPs removed the drums and contaminated soil. 2009
The EPA updated the site’s remedy, reducing the scope of the land use restriction to the fenced areas of the two OUs plus an 80-foot buffer around each fenced area. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published in 2021. The Sitewide Protectiveness status is protective in the short term. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls in the form of a restrictive covenant are in place to prevent inappropriate use of the Site.
Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
The EPA is working with the PRPs to determine whether ground water contamination is affecting surface water streams on Site, and to evaluate whether there is a need to use a more aggressive ground water cleanup approach.
Top of Page
Green Remediation
A pilot study of planting a native wildflower seed mix is being considered by the Site owner. The Site owner is also investigating the potential to place solar panels on a portion of the property. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA negotiated legal agreements with the site’s PRPs to investigate and clean up the site. The PRPs continue to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities.
Top of Page