TRI-CITY DISPOSAL CO.SHEPHERDSVILLE, KY 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 349-acre Tri-City Disposal Company Superfund site is located on State Highway 1526 in Shepherdsville, Bullitt County, Kentucky. The site includes a 57-acre landfill and several residential properties. Forested land, the Brushy Fork Creek and several springs border the site. The site’s broader surroundings include rural residential areas. Currently, a portion of the site is used for residential and agricultural purposes. From 1964 to 1967, the Tri-City Disposal Company operated a landfill at the site. The company disposed of highly volatile liquid wastes, lumber scraps and fiberglass insulation materials from various Louisville area industries at the on-site landfill. Landfill operations buried drums and stored drums above ground at the site. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989 because of contaminated groundwater, soil and surface water resulting from landfill operations. EPA, the Kentucky Department for Environmental Protection (KDEP)Exit and the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) have investigated site conditions and taken steps to clean up the site in order to protect people and the environment from contamination. By treating surface water and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, EPA, KDEP and the site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site’s PRPs lead site cleanup activities, with oversight provided by EPA and KDEP. Site investigations and cleanup activities have focused on two areas, which EPA refers to as operable units, or OUs. These areas include 
OU-1: groundwater contamination
OU-2: additional measures to mitigate threats from contamination. 
1988
EPA began emergency response activities at the site. EPA provided nearby residents with an alternate water source. EPA also dug up and disposed of drums and contaminated soil at an off-site facility. 1989
EPA provided nearby residences and businesses with an alternate water source. EPA also dug up and disposed of drums and contaminated soil at an off-site facility. 1991
The site’s long-term remedy (Record of Decision) selected in 1991, included 
placing institutional controls to restrict use of contaminated groundwater
providing affected residents with an alternate water supply
monitoring groundwater, surface water, sediment and living organisms
treating surface water in on-site springs if contamination is detected
sampling soil to determine the effectiveness of emergency removal activities
sampling of sediment and air
using a carbon absorption system to treat contaminated surface water
discharging treated water to a downstream tributary. 
1992
The site’s PRPs completed the remedial design in 1992. 1994
The PRPs completed construction of the remediation facilities in 1994 and began operating the carbon absorption system to address surface water contamination. Cleanup activities, including treatment of surface water, are ongoing. The PRPs placed a fence around one of the springs to limit access. 1996
EPA selected a cleanup plan (Record of Decision) for OU-2 in 1996. It included EPA’s decision that no further cleanup activities were necessary. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published by EPA HQs in 2018. The remedy at the Site is currently protective of human health and environment in the short term. 
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The use of spring water and groundwater at the Site remains restricted by institutional controls.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
EPA negotiated legal agreements with the site’s PRPs to investigate and clean up the site. The PRPs continues to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities.
Top of Page