OLD INGER OIL REFINERYDARROW, LA
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
Current Status Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) completed the third Five-Year review in August 8, 2017. The second Five-Year review was completed in August 28, 2012. During 2008 the EPA prepared a deletion package for this site. A Notice of Intent to Delete was published in the Federal Register on June 13, 2008. The public comment period closed July 14, 2008. No adverse comments were received; deletion became effective August 12, 2008. In 2007, the EPA completed the first Five-Year remedy review and found the remedy protective of public health and the environment. A public notice was published in a local newspaper and a fact sheet was mailed in March 2007.﻿ Site Background The 19-acre Old Inger Oil Refinery site is located near Darrow, Louisiana. A former oil refinery and waste oil reclamation facility operated on site beginning in 1967. Old Inger Oil Refinery bought the site in 1976 and operated the facility until 1978. Improper waste oil disposal activities contaminated soil, sediments, sludges, groundwater and surface water with hazardous chemicals. Following construction of the site’s remedy, EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 2008. National Priorities Listing (NPL) History
Proposed Date: 12/30/1982
Final Date: 9/8/1983
Deletion Proposal Date: 6/13/2008
Final Deletion Date: 8/12/2008 Location: Between Highway 75 and the Mississippi River, Ascension Parish, midway between Baton Rouge and New Orleans. 4.5 miles north of Darrow. Population: 367 people live with 2 miles of the site. 19,500 people live within 10 miles of site.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site was addressed through federal and state actions. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Continued protectiveness of the remedy requires mowing and maintenance of the soils cap and repair of the security fence. An oil refinery and waste oil reclamation facility began operating on site in 1967. Old Inger Oil Refinery bought the facility in 1976 and operated it until 1978. When the facility was active, trucks brought waste oils to the facility for processing and on-site storage. On-site lagoons held disposed waste sludges, oils and surface water. The company would occasionally siphon liquid from one of the lagoons to the swamp to maintain storage capacity in the lagoon. The siphoning process resulted in the discharge of oily materials into the swamp. Contamination at the site resulted from tank overfilling, discharges to the lagoons and swamps, and burial of drums and construction debris in lagoons. A large spill in March 1978 resulted in the discharge of used oil into the swamp. After the spill, ownership of the property changed. The new owners intended to clean up the site. However, the property owners found the cleanup to be uneconomical and abandoned the site in 1980. The Louisiana Environmental Control Commission formally declared the site abandoned in 1981.An oil refinery and waste oil reclamation facility began operating on site in 1967. Old Inger Oil Refinery bought the facility in 1976 and operated it until 1978. When the facility was active, trucks brought waste oils to the facility for processing and on-site storage. On-site lagoons held disposed waste sludges, oils and surface water. The company would occasionally siphon liquid from one of the lagoons to the swamp to maintain storage capacity in the lagoon. The siphoning process resulted in the discharge of oily materials into the swamp. Contamination at the site resulted from tank overfilling, discharges to the lagoons and swamps, and burial of drums and construction debris in lagoons. A large spill in March 1978 resulted in the discharge of used oil into the swamp. After the spill, ownership of the property changed. The new owners intended to clean up the site. However, the property owners found the cleanup to be uneconomical and abandoned the site in 1980. The Louisiana Environmental Control Commission formally declared the site abandoned in 1981.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy included the closing and sealing of an on-site ungrouted well; carbon adsorption treatment; in-place treatment, containment and capping of heavily contaminated soils; land use restrictions; and groundwater monitoring.Following cleanup, EPA took the site off the NPL in 2008.

Emergency Response and Removal
Cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. Removal actions from 1983 and 1988 included providing site security; controlling migration of on-site contamination; excavating, consolidating and containing soils; and sampling and analysis.
