Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The former Fort Devens Army Installation (Fort Devens) is located 35 miles west of Boston within the Towns of Ayer, Shirley, Lancaster and Harvard, Massachusetts.  The former Fort Devens was established in 1917 for support during World War I and became a permanent base until its Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) Committee closure in 1996.  The Fort Devens Superfund Site was listed on EPA the National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989. The Army and EPA signed a Federal Facility Agreement (FFA) in 1991.  Under the FFA, Army is considered the lead agency and EPA provides oversight as the lead regulatory agency.  Although not a signatory to the FFA, the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (MassDEP) has a participatory role in the investigation and remediation process.  The Army holds primary responsibility for investigation, design, construction, and operation and maintenance of all removal, response and remedial actions performed at the former military base.  The Army evaluates Study Areas (SA) across the former federal facility where releases of contaminants are suspected or known to have occurred and determines whether those areas pose a threat or potential threat to human health and the environment and warrant more detailed investigation as an Area of Contamination (AOC).  Of the 324 sites initially identified by Army, 54 were included in the FFA as probable SAs and AOCs.  To date, all initially identified sites have been evaluated and determined to be suitable for reuse with no further action or warranting additional investigation, remediation and/or long-term monitoring to address current and/or potential risk to human health and/or the environment.  Details regarding these sites are provided under "Cleanup Activities, What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?" below.  The Devens BRAC Cleanup Team (BCT), comprised of representatives from Army, MassDEP, MassDevelopment and EPA, was established in accordance with the Devens FFA, to meet or confer, as necessary, to review and discuss the status of ongoing investigation, cleanup, long-term groundwater and/or LUC monitoring activities at the sites discussed below. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Of the 54 sites identified as probable Study Areas (SAs) and Areas of Contamination (AOCs), all have been evaluated and either removed from further evaluation/action or have cleanup plans, known as Records of Decision (RODs), in place. Most of these sites are in the long-term monitoring (LTM) phase, where groundwater, surface water and/or sediments are monitored regularly.  Sites where contamination remains above levels that allow for unrestricted use / unlimited exposure (UU/UE) have land-use controls (LUCs) in place and are inspected annually. Sites with ongoing cleanup actions (i.e. RODs), including LTM and LUC sites, must be evaluated at least every five years to ensure that the selected remedy (i.e. cleanup action) remains protective of human health and the environment. The Army is required to present the results of the evaluation in a draft Five Year Review (FYR) Report to MassDevelopment, MassDEP and EPA for review and comment. The most recent (2020) FYR Report for the Fort Devens Superfund site was issued by Army on September 28, 2020.. However, given the number of deficiencies and inconsistencies wtih EPA's FYR guidance and directives and Army's decision to forego incorporation of previously agreed upon revisions in the final FYR report, EPA issued an independent finding of protectiveness for each of the remedial actions at the former Fort Devens and necessary recommended actions required to address the deficiencies andensure long-term protectiveness on September 25, 2020. Former Fort Devens 2020 Five-Year Review Independent Finding of Protectiveness, Summary of Issues and Recommendations and OU-specific and Sitewide Protectiveness Statements . . AOCs 4, 5 and 18 - Shepley’s Hill Landfill 
Shepley's Hill Landfill (SHL) encompasses approximately 84 acres in the northeast corner of the former Main Post area of Fort Devens.  The landfill is bordered to the northeast by Plow Shop Pond (PSP), to the west by Shepley’s Hill, to the south by commercial development, and to the east by a former railroad roundhouse.  Nonacoicus Brook, which drains Plow Shop Pond, is located north of the landfill in the North Impact Area (NIA). According to available military records, the landfill operated from 1917 to 1992 as the primary waste disposal site and for some period of time included open burning of a waste incinerator.   A Remedial Investigation (RI) and supplemental RI were performed at SHL between 1991 and 1993.  Results confirmed the presence of various inorganic and organic contaminants in groundwater, sediment, and surface water at and adjacent to SHL.  Potential human exposure to arsenic in groundwater was identified as the primary risk driver.  The selected remedy was memorialized in a 1995 ROD and included landfill closure, landfill maintenance, long-term groundwater monitoring, landfill gas monitoring, institutional controls, and FYRs. The ROD also included a contingency remedy of groundwater extraction and discharge to a public-owned treatment works in the event the 1995 remedy was ineffective in attaining cleanup goals by 2008. Due to continued detection of site contaminants exceeding cleanup goals and realization that cleanup goals would not be attained within the timeframe specified in the ROD, the Army constructed and implemented a groundwater extraction and treatment system in March 2006 along the northern edge of the landfill.   A vertical barrier wall was installed along the east portion of the landfill as part of a 2012 Non-Time Critical Removal Action (NTCRA) to mitigate the migration of arsenic-contaminated groundwater to Red Cove/Plow Shop Pond.  (See "AOC 72 - Red Cove/Plow Shop Pond" below). In October 2012, an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) incorporated additional LUCs into the 1995 ROD to address potential risks to residential receptors from arsenic-contaminated SHL groundwater.  Additionally, the Town of Ayer placed a moratorium on the installation of groundwater wells within and downgradient of the NIA in January 2013 to further reduce potential residential exposure to contaminated SHL groundwater migrating beyond the base boundary. In response to concerns raised in the 2015 and 2020 Fort Devens FYR Reports, supplemental investigations are underway to evaluate the effectiveness of the SHL remedy, specifically the ability of the groundwater extraction and treatment system to contain arsenic-contaminated SHL groundwater at the base boundary, achieve cleanup goals and ensure long-term protection of human health and the environment. The SHL property remains in Army ownership and is available for reuse via a lease agreement with MassDevelopment﻿.   AOC 72 - Red Cove/Plow Shop Pond (PSP)  / SA 71 - Former Railroad Roundhouse 
PSP is a 30-acre, man-made pond that receives inflow from Grove Pond to the east and uses a concrete dam to maintain/control water levels.  PSP and Grove Pond are both in an Area of Critical Environmental Concern, a Commonwealth of Massachusetts-designated area of ecological significance near a protected species habitat.  "Red Cove" refers to an area of arsenic-contaminated sediments located in the southwest corner of PSP along the northeast perimeter of SHL.  The former Railroad Roundhouse, operated by the Boston and Maine Railroad from approximately 1900 to 1935, consists of a 200- to 300-foot wide strip of land extending south from PSP along the northeast boundary of Devens.  Historical features include railroad tracks, a coal trestle, ash pit, water tower, and several buildings.  The railroad roundhouse was located at the northern end of this strip, immediately adjacent to the southern shore of PSP.  The shoreline adjacent to the railroad roundhouse is the location of the Maintenance By-Product Disposal Area that was used as a disposal area for locomotive maintenance waste.  PSP was initially evaluated as part of the SHL site.  Results of these investigations revealed metals, primarily arsenic, in sediments along the western edge of the pond.  PSP was designated AOC 72 and supplemental investigations commenced at PSP and Grove Pond with EPA taking the lead on the Grove Pond investigation and Army leading the surface water and sediment investigations in Red Cove and along the southern shoreline of the railroad roundhouse.  Following these limited investigations, Army conducted a RI for AOC 72 in 2011, confirming ongoing impacts to Red Cove/PSP sediments from the discharge of arsenic-impacted groundwater from SHL.  As recommended in the RI (and mentioned in "AOCs 4, 5 and 18 - Shepley’s Hill Landfill" above)﻿, Army commenced a NTCRA in 2012 to address impacts to Red Cove/PSP sediments caused by the discharge of contaminated groundwater from SHL.  The removal action included the installation of a vertical barrier wall between SHL and PSP (to mitigate future potential impacts) and the excavation of contaminated sediments from the Red Cove area and shoreline of the railroad roundhouse (to address historic/existing impacts).   In response to concerns raised in the 2020 FYR Report, additional baseline and five-year review pore water and sediment sampling will be performed in the Red Cove area of Plow Shop Pond to monitor barrier wall performance (and ongoing success of AOC 72 removal action). Devens Consolidation Landfill (DCL) and DCL Contributor Sites (SAs12 and 13; AOCs 9, 11, 40 and 41); and, Former Grant, Locust, and Cavite﻿ Housing Areas In accordance with the ﻿July 1999 ROD, Army constructed the approximate 25-acre DCL on the former Fort Devens golf course driving range between September 2000 and November 2002 to accommodate excavated material from the following AOCs and SAs (collectively referred to as the "DCL Contributor Sites"): 
SA 12 - A half-acre location where construction debris and yard waste were deposited, (approx. 8,700 cubic yards (cy) excavated);
SA 13 - A one-acre area used from 1965 to the mid-1990s for yard-waste, (approx. 10,000 cy excavated);
AOC 9 - An area used for storing wood, concrete, asphalt, metal, brick, glass, and tree stumps, (approx. 121,000 cy excavated);
AOC 11 - A former landfill used from 1975 to 1980 for disposal of wood-frame hospital demolition debris (approx. 35,000 cy excavated);
AOC 40 - Four acres used for construction debris, ash, stumps, and logs, (approx. 125,400 cy excavated);
AOC 41 - A one quarter-acre landfill in the SPIA that was used up to the 1950s for disposal of non- explosive material and household debris (approx. 1,500 cy excavated); and,
Former Grant, Locust, and Cavite Housing Areas - Soils and building-related materials contaminated with VOCs or pesticides (approx. 2,290 tons of soil and 1,240 tons of concrete excavated). 
The ROD also required long-term monitoring of landfill leachate, methane gas and adjacent groundwaterICs (i.e. deed restrictions) prohibiting residential use of the DCL and DCL Contributor Sitesment.  Because the 2015 Devens FYR inadvertently omitted the DCL Contributor SitesArmy was required to prepare and submit a 2015 FYR Addendum to evaluate/ensure continued effectiveness of the 1995 remedy (i.e. ICs) for these sites. In June 2019, Army submitted the "2015 FYR Addendum for the DCL Contributor Sites" for EPA review and comment. While enforcement and monitoring of ICs were deemed effective in providing short-term protection of human health and the environment, additional work to assess the remedy's ability to provide protection in the long-term. In response to concerns raised in the 2020 FYR Report, a Memorandum for the Record is being prepared to incorporate the existing deed restrictions prohibiting residential use into the selected remedy under Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), and requiring inspection in all future FYRs. The deed restrictions will be included in annual long term monitoring reports and described in a site-specific Land Use Control (LUC) Implementation Plan (LUCIP) that will include the DCL and three DCL Contributor Sites AOC 9, AOC 40 and SA 13. Because this is considered a minor change to the 1999 ROD, an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) is not required.  However, to maintain transparency and to adhere to the core values of including the public in all CERCLA decision-making processes, the Final Memorandum for the Record and an accompanying Fact Sheet, will be presented to the public for review and comment and will be placed in the Administrative Record for the site. 
. AOCs 25, 26, 27 and 41 - South Post Impact Area (SPIA)  
SPIA is located within the 4,800-acre area known as the South Post of the former Fort Devens and is currently used by Army, the Massachusetts National Guard, and law enforcement agencies for active weapons and ordnance discharge training.  The 964-acre "SPIA-monitored area" includes the following AOCs:    
AOC 25 - Former explosives ordnance discharge range (closed in 1996);  
AOC 26 - Zulu Range (explosive ordnance discharge and grenade training);  
AOC 27 - Hotel Range (small arms training); and,
AOC 41 - Former landfill (non-explosive military and household debris). 
A ROD for the SPIA-monitoring area in July 1996. While the ROD documented a “No Action” remedy for SPIA-monitored area groundwater, surface water, soil, and sediment, it included the following components to ensure protection of human health and the environment: groundwater monitoring for potential contaminant migration out of the SPIA-monitored area, long-term groundwater monitoring at the individual AOCs, sampling of Well D-1 (classified as a transient non-community supply well), development of an Integrated Natural Resources Management Plan (INRMP) (to monitor potential ecological impacts associated with continued use of the site for military training purposes), land-use restrictions (to prohibit installation of drinking water wells in the SPIA-monitored area) and FYRs. AOCs 44 and 52 - Barnum Road Maintenance Yards
These AOCs consist of four former vehicle maintenance yards totaling approximately 8.8 acres in the northeast corner of the former Fort Devens Main Post. Prior to base closure, AOC 44 was known as the Cannibalization Yard, where vehicles were stored before being dismantled for usable parts.  AOC 52, historically known as the TDA Maintenance Yard, was where vehicles were stored while awaiting repairs. A ROD signed in March 1995 required excavation of the top two feet of soil from across the site and two known release areas, treatment of soils exceeding site PAH and TPH cleanup levels by cold mix asphalt batching, application of a pavement-wearing course for vehicle-parking surface, expansion of the existing storm water collection system, groundwater monitoring, deed restrictions (prohibiting future residential use) and development and implementation of soil management practices to minimize potential exposure to contaminated subsurface soils. In 1995, over 30,000 cubic yards of soil were sampled and excavated, 11,800 cubic yards of which were treated by cold mix asphalt batching and backfilled/compacted with the uncontaminated excavated soils as a sub-base material in the excavation. Four inches of bituminous pavement was placed over the sub-based material as a pavement wearing course for Army vehicle parking. The existing stormwater drainage system was expanded to collect storm water from the newly paved surface and a detention pond was constructed to store accumulated rainfall and minimize flow at the outfall of Cold Spring Brook during heavy storm events.   The groundwater underlying the Maintenance Yards is classified by the MassDEP as a source of potable water supply. Based on a 1992 SI water level survey, inferred groundwater flow from the Maintenance Yards is northeast towards the Town of Ayer's Grove Pond water supply wells. Three rounds of groundwater monitoring were performed at two monitoring wells, G3M-93-10X and G3M-93-11X, in 1998, 1999 and 2003. No significant contamination was detected supporting the conclusion that surface soil contaminants at the Cannibalization Yard had not affected the aquifer. Based on these results, additional monitoring wells were not required. A Remedial Action Completion Report (RACR) was issued in 1996 confirming successful implementation of remedy components and attainment of response actions objectives set forth in the ROD.  Because ICs (i.e. deed restrictions prohibiting residential reuse of the site and access to site groundwater for residential or commercial purposes) and soil management practices (for construction-related activities) are components of the selected remedy, FYRs are required. The property was retained by Army and is the current site of the Armed Forces Reserve Center complex, constructed in 2010.  The complex includes a large training building and a U.S. Army Reserve and U.S. Marine Corps Reserve Organizational Maintenance Shop/Area Maintenance Support Activities building.  To address concerns raised in the 2020 FYR Report, a site-specific LUCIP will be prepared to clearly identify requirements for the effective implementation, monitoring and enforcement of the ROD-required LUCs/ICs and items to be evaluated during annual LUC inspections conducted in conjunction with the Annual Main Post LTM activities. AOCs 32 and 43A - Defense Reutilization and Marketing Office Yard 
AOC 32, known as the Defense Reutilization and Marketing Office Yard (DRMO), was an active materials storage facility from approximately 1964 to 1995 consisting of three fenced areas where various materials were processed and stored, and a former waste oil underground storage tank (UST).  The UST tank was removed in 1992 and associated contaminated soils were excavated and disposed of off-site.  The selected remedy in the 1998 ROD was excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soils and debris and monitored natural attenuation (MNA) for groundwater. AOC 43A, known as the POL (petroleum, oil and lubricants) Storage Area served as the central distribution point for all gasoline stations at Fort Devens during the 1940s and 1950s, and was subsequently used to store fuels for various purposes.  The distribution facility consisted of a main gasoline station, a pump house, four 12,000-gallon USTs, one 10,000-gallon UST, two 12,000-gallon above-ground storage tanks (ASTs), and two 8,000-gallon ASTs.  Gasoline was delivered by rail car and transferred to the tanks.  The selected remedy in the 1998 ROD was MNA to address groundwater contamination. Groundwater sampling results following the injection and subsequent LTM data indicates a significant decline in contaminants of concern.  LTM and performance monitoring is ongoing. Institutional controls prohibiting groundwater use, were specified in the May 2000, Finding of Suitability to Transfer (FOST) and incorporated into the deed prior to property transfer. AOCs 43G and 43J - Historic Gas Station 
AOCs 43G and 43J are located in the central portion of the former Main Post of Fort Devens.  AOC 43G consists of the former Army Air Force Exchange Service gas station and historic Gas Station G.  Motor pool operations were halted during the late 1940s or early 1950s.  The AOC 43J property was transferred from the Army to MassDevelopment in 2006.  A June 2006, Grant of Environmental Restriction and Easement (GERE) was issued by MassDEP and recorded by MassDevelopment with the appropriate Registry of Deeds. The selected remedy in the 1996 ROD for both AOCs included intrinsic bioremediation, supplemental data collection, groundwater modeling, and long-term groundwa