ROSE DISPOSAL PITLANESBORO, MA 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Rose Disposal Pit site is a 1-acre waste disposal area in Lanesborough, Massachusetts. Beginning in 1951 and continuing through 1959, waste oils and solvents from the General Electric (GE) Plant in nearby Pittsfield were disposed of in an open trench at the site. In 1980, the State Department of Environmental Quality Engineering inspected the site and found 15,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Two plumes of contaminated groundwater were discovered moving to the east and south away from the disposal area. Immediate actions were then taken to protect human health and the environment that included removing contaminated material as well as construction of the site’s long-term remedy, a groundwater treatment system. Groundwater treatment ﻿and monitoring are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. The EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by the EPA. This means that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Continued protectiveness of the remedy in the long-term required implementation of institutional controls to prohibit groundwater use within site boundaries and limit land use within the disposal area for groundwater and residual soils on site. These institutional controls, in the form of a "Grant of Environmental Restriction and Easement," were placed on the property's deed in 2010. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy included: 
Providing an alternate water supply to affected residents
Removing and treating contaminated soil
Covering the disposal area
Extracting and treating contaminated groundwater (which is ongoing). 
Additionally, sediments and surface water from a pond nearby the disposal area were treated. These efforts have eliminated the potential of exposure to hazardous materials from these media. All construction activities have finished at the site. Soil cleanup was finished in July 1994. The groundwater extraction and treatment system, built in 1993, will continue to operate until site cleanup levels are met. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of document, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
GE conducts a semi-annual groundwater monitoring event. Top of Page