Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 40-acre Hatheway & Patterson site is located in a mixed residential and industrial area of Mansfield and Foxborough, Massachusetts. A former wood preserving facility operated on site. Operation included preserving wood sheeting, planking, timber, piling, poles and other wood products. Facility operations led to soil, groundwater and sediment contamination. Following cleanup, operation and maintenance activities and monitoring are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The major components of the remedy as described in the (ROD September 30, 2005) and ESD (August 29, 2011) are: 
Approximately 43,500 tons of contaminated soil were excavated and shipped off-site to a hazardous waste landfill.
Hazardous materials within the approximately 2 acres of the Site in Foxborough, MA were consolidated in place under an asphalt cover.
The use of Institutional Controls to prohibit the use of Site groundwater and restrict land uses in a manner that ensure the protectiveness of the remedy as described in the ROD, and ensure the integrity of the on-site low-permeability cover and other remedial components. Risks from soil exposures within the area of the existing railroad right of way were evaluated during design and appropriate action such as deed restrictions or other legal and administrative measures will be implemented if necessary;
Long-term monitoring of groundwater, surface water, and sediment;
Five-year reviews, and operation and maintenance of remedial components, including the low permeability cover. 
All required remedial actions have been successfully completed and all cleanup goals have been achieved.  Additional response actions are not necessary as past actions have been sufficient to address risks to human health and the environment. All institutional controls in the form of Notice of Activity and Use Limitations are in place. MassDEP will continue routine monitoring of the Site and EPA will conduct Five-Year Reviews to ensure that the remedial actions remain protective. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA completed the second Five-Year Review Report on September 5, 2019. The first Five-Year Review Report, September 3, 2014 (176 pp, 18.22 MB), About PDF) was completed in September 2014 and subsequent reviews are completed every five years following. The five year review is required due to the fact that hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remain at the Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. The second Five-Year Review Report, Septmember 5, 2019 (61 pp, 6.87 MB, About PDF) concluded that the remedy is protective of human health and the environment because exposure pathways are being controlled by comprehensive institutional controls implemented in 2015. Mass DEP will continue to collect samples from the Site and EPA will conduct another five year review in 2024. The site’s long-term remedy included excavation and off-site disposal of 43,500 tons of contaminated soil, asphalt capping of a 2-acre area, institutional controls, five-year reviews, and long-term monitoring of groundwater, surface water, fish tissue and sediment. Cleanup took place between late summer in 2009 and the fall of 2010. In general, based on EPA’s evaluation of the data, the remedy protects human health and the environment because remediation of the soil (soil removal and on-site consolidation) has been completed to cleanup levels that are considered protective for the anticipated future use of the property, and there is no current use of on-site groundwater which is classified as non-potable. Institutional controls are in place. Operation and maintenance activities are on-going and will ensure that the consolidation area and associated components of the remedy (e.g., groundwater monitoring wells) remain in good condition. In addition, monitoring of groundwater will continue to assess the protectiveness of the remedy.  Monitoring data collected as part of the operation and maintenance plan for the Site will continue to be collected for the foreseeable future and the data will be continuously evaluated. EPA will conduct periodic reviews of the site at a minimum of every five years.  During these reviews, EPA will inspect the site and will review all monitoring data to insure the remedy continues to function as designed and constructed and remains protective of public health and the environment.  If additional actions are warranted, EPA will implement those actions. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The matrix below is a general summary of the restrictions at this site at the date of this report. The information in this matrix is a general description of the restrictions at the site only. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above. Note that where multiple entries occur, it will impact more than one pathway.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of document, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page