Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 50-acre Sutton Brook Disposal Area Superfund Site is located in Tewksbury, Massachusetts. A small part of the site also extends into the town of Wilmington. The site includes three source areas – a 50-acre landfill, an area of buried drums (excavated in 2000) and contaminated soils associated with the drum disposal area (excavated in 2000 and 2007). Waste disposal activities can be traced back to at least 1957, when an area of the site was used as a "burning dump." The Tewksbury Board of Health originally used this area as a temporary disposal area (landfill). In 1961, the temporary assignment was modified to require that the landfill on the site be operated as a sanitary landfill, accepting municipal refuse generated only in Tewksbury. The assignment was not complied with; the landfill accepted municipal, commercial and industrial wastes from both inside and outside Tewksbury. The owners of the landfill received numerous citations from state and local officials for violating Massachusetts Sanitary Landfill Regulations. In 1966, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Commissioner of Public Health ordered the Town of Tewksbury to operate the landfill using the sanitary landfill method. However, after 1966, there were documented occurrences of landfill burning, uncovered waste areas, the filling in of on-site wetlands, and wastes disposed of below the water table and landfill slopes that exceeded operation plans. Due to these violations, the Commonwealth ordered the closure of the landfill in 1979. At the time of its closure, the landfill was accepting in excess of 250 tons of waste per day. Despite the closure order, landfill operations continued until 1982, when official landfill operations were suspended, yet waste acceptance continued through 1988. In 1983, a loam screening business began operation on the property. On August 11, 1983, during an inspection by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality Engineering (MADEQE, now MassDEP), underground burning was observed through fissures in the ground in the southern landfill lobe. During a subsequent inspection by MADEQE personnel in August 1983, flames and smoke were no longer visible after heavy machinery had covered the fissures with soil. Subsequent investigations by Tewksbury Health Inspectors and MADEQE documented piles of demolition debris and soil on areas of the property, in some cases adjacent to and/or encroaching upon on-site wetland areas. The site was placed on the National Priorities List (NPL) in June 2001.﻿ Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. Construction of the remedy began in 2014 and was completed in 2016. Cleanup Progress. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Three short-term cleanups by EPA in 2000 excavated and removed contaminated soils and deteriorated drums, protecting human health and the environment in the short term. EPA selected the site’s long-term remedy in 2007. It included excavation of additional soils and sediments; consolidation of the material in the on-site landfills and landfill capping; groundwater collection and treatment, monitored natural attenuation for areas of groundwater contamination not captured by the extraction system, with a contingency to expand the area of active groundwater remediation, if necessary; institutional controls such as deed restrictions and/or local ordinances to prevent unacceptable exposures to wastes left in place and to restrict exposure to contaminated groundwater until cleanup levels are met; and long-term monitoring. Construction of the remedy was substantially completed during 2014 and 2015.  A final inspection of the remedy was conducted in 2016.  Since the final inspection, contaminated groundwater has continued to be extracted from the site for treatment and the landfill cap and wetland restoration areas have undergone and will continue to undergo periodic inspection, monitoring and maintenance. The most recent report on the progress of natural attenuation of contaminants in groundwater at the site may be found here: 2024 Groundwater Natural Attenuation Report (587 pp, 126 MB, About PDF). On Feb. 11, 2025, EPA transmitted a letter to the PRP group with comments on the natural attenuation report, which may be reviewed here (5 pp, 1,061 KB, About PDF). Five-year reviews are conducted to ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. Cleanup Progress. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional Controls are required for this site. EPA's most recent correspondence on ICs for the site may be found here: EPA response to revised ICs compliance monitoring report (7 pp, 410 KB, About PDF). On Nov. 15, 2024, the PRP group submitted a memo documenting compliance with the IC monitoring plan for the site, including documentation that the towns of Tewksbury and Wilmington had updated their groundwater use restriction areas based on the most recent maps of the plume area and 500-foot buffer zone. The memo may be found here: IC Compliance Memo (9 pp, 6.2 MB, About PDF). This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. In order to determine the current status of ICs for this site, the site contacts should be consulted. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found on the site profile page and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page