Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Baird & McGuire facility is located on a 20-acre site in Holbrook and operated as a chemical mixing and batching company from 1912 to 1983. Later activities included mixing, packaging, storing, and distributing various products, including pesticides, disinfectants, soaps, floor waxes, and solvents. Some of the raw materials used at the site were stored in a tank farm and piped to the laboratory or mixing buildings. Other raw materials were stored in drums on site. Waste disposal methods at the site included direct discharge into the soil, a nearby brook, wetlands, and a former gravel pit. Hazardous wastes historically were disposed of in an on-site lagoon and cesspool. Also included on site were two lagoons open to rain and large areas of buried wastes such as cans, debris, lab bottles, and hundreds of bottles of chemicals. The lagoon area has been capped with clay. The on-site buildings were in various states of disrepair and unsecured; early activities conducted by EPA included demolishing all but one of the buildings and the tank farms. The tank farm area was temporarily capped. The site is completely fenced and a groundwater recirculation system was operated to contain the groundwater plume until permanent remedies were implemented. The site is 500 feet west of the Cochato River. The Cochato River had at one time, been diverted into the Richardi Reservoir, a water system serving nearly 90,000 people in the Towns of Holbrook, Randolph, and Braintree. Currently, the Cochato River is not being used as a supply source for the Richardi Reservoir. The South Street well field, part of the municipal water supply for Holbrook, is located within 1,500 feet of the site and was shut down in 1982. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed in five stages: immediate actions and four long-term remedial phases addressing the cleanup of the groundwater, soil, and sediments and the provision of an alternate water supply. Initial Action:  The EPA completed a hydrological study in connection with this site. The initial response action taken included the removal of 1,020 cubic yards of hazardous waste, 1 ton of waste creosote, 25 gallons of waste coal tar, 155 pounds of solid hazardous waste, 47 drums of flammable liquids and solids, and 2 drums of corrosives. Additional activity included construction of a clay cap, installation of a groundwater interception/recirculation system, installation of 5,700 feet of fencing, and extensive soil, groundwater, surface water, and air sampling. The site was graded, capped, and seeded. The site is secured by a fence to limit contact with contaminants. Groundwater:  The final cleanup remedy chosen to address groundwater contamination involves pumping groundwater and treating it at an on-site treatment plant. Treated groundwater is discharged to the aquifer located on site. On- and off-site groundwater is monitored. A new 300,000 gallon-per-day groundwater pump and discharge treatment plant was constructed and began operating in 1993. Approximately 40 million gallons of groundwater were treated during the plant's first year of operation. In 1999, a light non-aqueous phase liquid extraction (LNAPL) system was constructed and has been collecting approximately 5 to 7 gallons of LNAPL per day. This liquid waste is collected and shipped off-site for treatment and disposal. In June 2004, the state took over responsibility for operations and maintenance (O&M) of the treatment facilities. Operation of the treatment plant and LNAPL extraction system are expected to continue well into the future. Soil: In 1992, the EPA awarded a contract to OHM Remediation Services Corporation for construction of a mobile soil incinerator. A trial burn of the incinerator was held in January 1995. Following acceptance of the Trial Burn results, the mobile incinerator began full scale incineration of contaminated soils in June 1995. OHM completed the incineration of approximately 248,000 tons of contaminated soil and sediment on June 17, l997. Demobilization of the mobile incinerator began immediately. The site is now graded, topsoil placed, and upland areas have been re-seeded. Wetlands have also been restored and are being monitored. Sediments: The groundwater discharge is believed to be partially responsible for contamination of Cochato River sediments and adjoining wetlands. Field investigations in 1987 and 1988 determined that contaminated groundwater and surface runoff from the site continue to be the principal sources of contamination of the wetlands adjacent to the site. The investigations defined the contaminants of concern and recommended alternatives for final surface water and sediment cleanup. The investigations also determined that site contaminants were being effectively trapped in river sediments and were not migrating down-river. In late 1989, a remedy was selected that included excavating and incinerating 1,500 cubic yards of sediments on site. Design of cleanup actions was completed in 1991. Construction activities were completed in 1995. A total of 4,712 cubic yards of contaminated sediment were removed from the river. Periodic sampling of the river sediments and fish in the River and in Sylvan Lake is also conducted. 
Water Supply: In 1990, the EPA selected a final cleanup remedy that will reactivate the Donna Road Aquifer, thereby replacing the loss caused by contamination. This is a state lead RD/RA. Design of this remedy began in 1991 and was completed in late 1994. Revisions to the design were conducted by the state at the request of the receiving towns; however, construction of the well-head treatment system did not occur. In late 2001, the Joint Water Board of Holbrook and Randolph stated that they had concerns about the construction of the treatment plant with the major concern being the expenses associated the operation and maintenance of the plant. The Board proposed that the EPA/Mass DEP funding slated for Donna Rd. be instead used to contribute to the ongoing construction project for expansion of the Great Pond Reservoir for replacement of the lost demand from site contamination of the aquifer. In August 2003, EPA issued two Explanations of Significant Differences (ESDs) to fund the expansion project instead of implementing the Donna Road water treatment plant construction. Mass DEP has provided funding to the local water board. Thus, this Operable Unit is complete. Enforcement Highlights: Between 1954 and 1977, the company was fined at least 35 times by various State and Federal agencies for numerous violations. A citizen complaint of an oily substance on the Cochato River initiated a site inspection, which reported surface water, groundwater, and wetlands contamination. In 1983, the City of Holbrook revoked Baird & McGuire's permit to store chemicals and ordered it to dismantle the existing storage facilities. The EPA identified four parties potentially responsible for site contamination and issued a final Consent Decree requiring the parties to reimburse the EPA for cleanup activities on an "ability to pay" basis. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Cleanup actions, including the construction of a fence, removal of hazardous waste, pumping and treating groundwater, cleanup of sediments, and incineration of soil have reduced the potential of exposure to contamination and continue to reduce contamination levels at the Baird & McGuire site, making the area safer while remaining cleanup activities continue. The groundwater treatment facility, constructed in 1993, continues to operate and will operate for the foreseeable future. The soil and Cochato River sediment cleanup was completed in 1997. The groundwater treatment plant currently treats influent at approximately 138 gallons per minute and the LNAPL extraction system collects approximately 5 to 7 gallons per day for off-site treatment and disposal. The Mass DEP took over site-wide O&M in June 2004. The second Five-Year Review was completed in September 2004 and the report concluded that all remedies implemented at the site remain protective of human health and the environment. Recommendations offered in the report include continuing groundwater, wetland, sediment and fish tissue monitoring; and that Institutional Controls be implemented to prohibit groundwater use, limit soil excavation and maintain access and security of the on-going remedy and its components. The third and fourth Five-Year Review was completed in September 2009 and September 2014, respectively. Cleanup actions, including the construction of a fence, removal of hazardous waste, pumping and treating groundwater, cleanup of sediments, and incineration of soil have reduced the potential of exposure to contamination and continue to reduce contamination levels at the Baird & McGuire site, making the area safer while remaining cleanup activities continue. The groundwater treatment facility, constructed in 1993, continues to operate and will operate for the foreseeable future. The soil and Cochato River sediment cleanup was completed in 1997. The groundwater treatment plant currently treats influent at approximately 138 gallons per minute and the LNAPL extraction system collects approximately 5 to 7 gallons per day for off-site treatment and disposal. The Mass DEP took over site-wide O&M in June 2004. The second Five-Year Review was completed in September 2004 and the report concluded that all remedies implemented at the site remain protective of human health and the environment. Recommendations offered in the report include continuing groundwater, wetland, sediment and fish tissue monitoring; and that Institutional Controls be implemented to prohibit groundwater use, limit soil excavation and maintain access and security of the on-going remedy and its components. The EPA completed the fifth Five-Year Review report (83 pp, 14 MB, About PDF) on July 29, 2019. The first Five-Year Review report (113 pp, 6 MB, About PDF) was completed in September 1999 and subsequent reviews were completed every five years following. Five-Year Reviews are required by law due to the fact that hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants remain at the Site above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. The fifth Five-Year Review concluded that the remedy is protective in the short-term of human health and the environment because exposure pathways are being controlled by implementation of the remedy and by comprehensive institutional controls implemented in 2018. However, for the remedy to be protective in the long-term, the groundwater clean-up levels need to be re-evaluated. EPA is currently working with the MassDEP to collect additional data about the Site conditions in order to complete this evaluation and determine how to improve the current clean-up efforts.  Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found on the site profile page and EPA the regional offices may also be contacted.  Top of Page