Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Microfab, Inc. (Former) Site is located at 106 Haverhill Road in Amesbury, MA. The Microfab property is located in a mixed commercial, industrial, and residential area.  The property is bound to the north by Haverhill Road (Highway 110) with residential properties beyond, to the east by a small commercial property, to the southeast by undeveloped property including wetlands, and the west and southwest by Boston North Technology Park, LLC. The approximately 14-acre property includes a 102,000 square foot, three-story factory building built in about 1950, a detached former wastewater treatment plant building constructed in 1976, former paved parking areas, and wooded undeveloped wetland areas. Both builldings are abandoned and in poor structural condition. An unnamed stream flows adjacent to the Site's west perimeter, draining into a large wetland to the south which is associated with the Merrimack River.  Microfab is a former industrial property that has been vacant and unoccupied since 1987. Industrial activities were conducted on the property between 1950 and 1987, and included metal parts manufacturing, printed circuit board production, electroplating, and associated metal finishing processes.  During this time, the property was used for the disposal and treatment of wastes, including wastes containing hazardous substances.  According to historical records, the three main sources of contamination on the property included: (1) p﻿rior to the construction of the wastewater treatment plant, outfall pipes at the factory building discharged untreated wastewater directly to the adjacent unnamed stream and wetlands; (2) spills, releases, and improper waste management practices which resulted in contaminated soils; and (3) dry wells and leach fields used for disposal which released contaminants into the subsurface.  In October of 1987, Microfab filed a petition in federal bankruptcy court to commence liquidation proceedings. The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality Engineering (DEQE), now referred to MassDEP, subsequently assumed responsibility for cleanup actions at the Site. Samples collected from the Microfab property by MassDEP and EPA indicate the presence of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), cyanide, and metals in groundwater, surface water, sediment and soils.  VOCs and metals were also detected in sections of the unnamed stream and wetland areas.  Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Site was listed on the Massachusetts Confirmed Hazardous Waste List in 1987.  Between 1988 and 1991, MassDEP conducted several site investigations, including an interim Phase II Comprehensive Site Assessment (CSA) and risk characterization. This resulted in the installation of a fence in the western portion of the site to prevent human contact with contaminated wetland sediments, and the construction and operation of a groundwater extraction and treatment system. The treatment system operated on the property between 1991 and 2012, and consisted of a series of six extraction wells pumping groundwater to a treatment shed. The treatment system included metals removal, air stripping, and granulated activated carbon (GAC) treatment prior to discharge. The treatment system ceased operations based on the changing nature and location of the groundwater plume over time. In August of 2000, MassDEP expanded the fencing footprint due to high concentrations of arsenic encountered in surface soil on the property. In 2015, EPA performed a Site Inspection (SI) of the Microfab property. Sampling during the SI detected various VOCs, metals, SVOCs, and cyanide at concentrations which exceeded background levels by three times or more in surface water and sediments on the property. EPA Region 1 proposed the Site to the EPA National Priorities List (“NPL”) on September 9, 2016.  EPA received letters in support of the proposal to add this site to the NPL from the Amesbury Mayor, Board of Selectmen, several other city departments and the Governor of Massachusetts. The Site was included in the final listing of NPL sites by publication in the Federal Register on August 3, 2017 (82 Fed. Reg. 36095).  EPA obtained access to perform work at the Microfab Site via an Administrative Inspection Warrant obtained through the U.S. District Court of Massachusetts. EPA commenced initial RI field activites and investigations at the Site in January 2019. Available historical information and data were compiled and reviewed to provide an initial assessment of past industrial operations and disposal methods at the Site, past environmental investigations and findings, potential contaminant extent, and the local geology and hydrogeology. A preliminary conceptual site model (CSM) was developed, and data gaps pertinent to determining the current nature and extent of contamination in addition to human health and ecological risk assessment needs were identified. Samples of soil, groundwater, sediment, surface water and pore water were collected and analyzed. The initial investigations substantiated that VOCs, (including trichloroethylene (TCE), cis-1,2-DCE, tetrachloroethene (PCE), and vinyl chloride), and metals (including copper, lead, nickel, arsenic and chromium) are present at the Microfab site. A Data Evaluation Report dated March 2020 was prepared to document initial findings. On April 22, 2019, EPA initiated a time-critical removal action to sample, characterize, remove residual hazardous and non-hazardous chemicals (including liquid acids, lead plating solids, acid crystals) from tanks and vats that remained in the former factory building.  The EPA removal action was completed on July 15, 2019.  Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
In 2020, EPA initiated a new contracting process to continue the Microfab RI/FS, which will include conducting additional field work and investigations, performing human health and ecological risk assessments, preparing an RI report, and completing a feasibility study report to evaluate potential remedial alternatives for the Site. Field activities and investigations at the Site are resuming during summer 2021. Top of Page