Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Iron Horse Park Superfund Site is located in North Billerica, Massachusetts. The Site is an approximately 553-acre industrial complex. It includes manufacturing and rail yard maintenance facilities, open storage areas, landfills, and remediated wastewater lagoons. A long history of industrial activities at the site, beginning in 1913, has resulted in the contamination of soil, sediments, groundwater, and surface water. Site cleanup, operation and maintenance activities, and environmental monitoring are ongoing. The Site is separated into four Operable Units (OUs). A description of each OU is provided below: OU1: Boston & Maine (B&M) Wastewater Lagoons This OU consists of a former 15-acre wastewater lagoon area. A Record of Decision (ROD) selecting a bioremediation remedy to treat contaminated lagoon sediments and soils was issued for OU1 on September 15, 1988. An Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) revising the remedy to allow for the treatment of contaminated material via off-site asphalt batching was issued by EPA on October 1, 1997. OU2: Shaffer Landfill A ROD selecting a cap reconstruction as the remedy for the 60-acre landfill was issued on June 27, 1991. A settlement to implement the landfill capping remedy at OU2 was reached with responsible parties in the fall of 2000. An ESD modifying the remedy to remove leachate via extraction wells was issued by EPA on September 8, 2000. OU3: Source Areas/Areas of Concern (AOCs), EPA issued a ROD for OU3 on September 30, 2004 that required the capping of landfills and contaminated soil areas at six different AOCs, and continued maintenance of a landfill cap at a seventh Areas ofConcern (AOCs). A settlement to implement the source control remedy at OU3 was reached with responsible parties in the fall of 2007. An ESD modifying the remedy to eliminate a regulatory requirement from the list of Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) was issued by EPA on June 19, 2009. The AOCs include: 
AOC 1: B&M Railroad Landfill
AOC 2: Reclamation Services, Inc. (RSI) Landfill
AOC 3: B&M Locomotive Shop Disposal Area
AOC 4: B&M Oil/Sludge Recycling Area
AOC 5: Contaminated Soils Area
AOC 6: Asbestos Landfill
AOC 7﻿: Asbestos Lagoons 
OU4:﻿ Impacts to Site-wide Surface Water, Sediments, and Groundwater, EPA issued a ROD for OU4 on July 25, 2011, that included requirements for sediment removal from B&M Pond, monitored natural recovery (MNR) of sediment in other areas throughout the Site, implementation of stormwater controls to prevent re-contamination of sediments, and long-term monitoring of groundwater. An ESD modifying the remedy to reduce the volume of sediment to be excavated, change cleanup levels for the delineation of sediment to be excavated, and providing a Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) determination for polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in sediment was issued by EPA on July 22, 2014. A settlement to implement the remedy at OU4 was reached with responsible parties in the fall of 2014. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Site is being addressed through federal and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. The removal of asbestos materials and capping the asbestos landfill have reduced the potential for exposure to asbestos at the site. The installation of a cap at the Shaffer Landfill helped to control odors and eliminate the migration of contaminants into the surface water and groundwater on- and off-Site. Removal of contaminated soils from the B&M Wastewater Lagoons area completed that portion of the site’s remedy. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the Site’s remedies. These reviews ensure that the selected and constructed remedies protect public health and the environment. The most recent (2023) review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedies selected by EPA. The status of site remedies from the 2023 Five-Year Review is summarized below. The remedy for the B&M Wastewater Lagoons is protective of human health and the environment. The remedy for Shaffer Landfill is expected to be protective of human health and the environment upon completion. In the interim, exposure pathways that could result in unacceptable risks are being controlled. The remedy for sitewide source areas is expected to be protective upon completion. The remedy for sitewide surface water, sediment, remaining soil and groundwater has not yet been implemented. The site’s sixth Five-Year Review was completed in September 2023. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The Site is being addressed in four stages: the initial actions and four long-term remedial phases focused on cleanup of the lagoon areas, Shaffer Landfill, remaining sitewide source areas, and groundwater, surface water, and sediments across the rest of the site. Cleanup of the B&M Wastewater Lagoons, a former 15-acre wastewater lagoon area, involved excavation of contaminated material and transport off site to an asphalt batching plant for treatment. The remedy for the 60-acre Shaffer Landfill included capping, maintenance and monitoring of the cap, surface drainage system and landfill gas collection/flare system, and leachate collection and off-site disposal. The source control remedy included capping of landfills and contaminated soil areas at six different Areas of Concern (AOCs), and maintenance of an existing landfill cap at a seventh AOC. Cleanup of sitewide surface water, sediment, remaining soil and groundwater includes sediment removal from B&M Pond, monitored natural recovery (MNR) of sediment, and long-term monitoring of groundwater to ensure containment of contaminants within an established Groundwater Compliance Boundary (GCB). ﻿On September 12th, 2022, EPA finalized the Preliminary Close Out Report (PCOR) for the Site. The PCOR documents that the Responsible Parties have completed all remedial construction activities at the Site under EPA oversight, including appropriate construction activities for the Remedial Actions at OU1, OU2, OU3, and OU4. EPA, MassDEP, and the Site's Responsible Parties for OU3 and OU4 are currently finalizing a Long-Term Operations, Monitoring, and Maintenance Plan (LTOMMP) that will govern future inspections of the constructed remedies, ensure appropriate maintenance of the remedies, and allow for comprehensive assessments of cleanup progress for surface water, sediment, and groundwater at the Site. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above. Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remain onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found on the site profile page and EPA the regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Site cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In 1984, EPA removed asbestos deposits and covered an asbestos landfill with gravel, stone, and topsoil. EPA then seeded and fenced the area. By covering the asbestos landfill, EPA eliminated the potential of inhaling fugitive asbestos dust particles. Top of Page