Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Norwood PCBs site is located in Norwood, Massachusetts where about 8,000 people live within a mile of the site. The 26-acre site consists of several parcels of land, including the former Grant Gear facility, Kerry Place, and adjacent areas including Meadow Brook. Beginning in the 1940s, previous owners or operators of the Grant Gear building used polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in the production of electrical transformers and other electrical components.In 1979, the site was subdivided. The northeastern portion of the site, about 9 acres in size, was purchased by Grant Gear Realty Trust and leased to Grant Gear Works, Inc. The southern and western parts of the site were further subdivided, a major portion of which was named Kerry Place. Most of the lots now are occupied by commercial and light industrial buildings. In 1983, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts originally investigated the site in response to a telephone call from a resident and detected high levels of PCBs in the soil on site, and EPA conducted an emergency removal of contaminated soil.  Also, further excavation of contaminated soil/sediment, implementation of caps and covers, and building demolition were conducted between 1996 and 1998, and contaminated groundwater was treated from 1996 until 2000. Following cleanup, EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in June 2011. Monitoring activities are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. In 1983, EPA led an emergency removal of more than 500 tons of highly contaminated soil from the site and took it to a disposal facility. In 1986, the state installed a 4-foot wire mesh fence around a 1-acre part of the Grant Gear property and covered contaminated soils within the fenced areas with a filter-fabric liner and six inches of crushed stone. The cleanup plan selected by EPA in 1989 included excavating soils and sediments; treating these materials and disposing of them on site; flushing or replacing the site drainage system; treating contaminated groundwater; and restoring wetlands. The groundwater treatment facility began operating in March 1996. In May 1996, EPA updated the cleanup plan to include demolition of the on-site Grant Gear building, excavation of contaminated soils and sediments from Meadow Brook, excavation of a "hot spot" of contaminated soil in contact with the groundwater, consolidation of contaminated soils and sediments on part of the site, and construction of asphalt cap and gravel cover areas. The new plan was intended to support reuse of the property for commercial or industrial purposes, which has since been done. Following these efforts, EPA shut down the groundwater treatment plant in June 2000. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. Long-term periodic monitoring and operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Cleanup activities are complete and long-term periodic monitoring activities are ongoing. In 2008, developers finished building two single-story retail buildings totaling 56,000 square feet. EPA, the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, and the Town of Norwood provided oversight during construction to make sure the cleanup was done properly and construction adhered to the approved work plan for redevelopment. Land use restrictions ensure the site’s remedy is protected.Following cleanup, EPA took the site off the NPL in June 2011.
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of document, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Annual monitoring of the groundwater is conducted by the responsible parties. Top of Page