BJAT LLCFRANKLIN, MA 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
BJAT LLC is an approximately 18.3-acre property located at 300 Fisher Street in Franklin, Norfolk County, Massachusetts. Beginning in the late 1800s the BJAT LLC property was used for industrial operations including the manufacture of rubber and plastic products. The property has not been active since 1985. The current owner of the site has conducted four environmental investigations from 2005 to 2012. These include an Environmental Site Assessment in 2005; a Subsurface Investigation in 2007; a Site Inspection in 2008 and a Comprehensive Site Assessment in 2012. Previous investigations have found process waste and debris containing hazardous substances including metals and semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) at concentrations above applicable state standards.  The site was listed on EPA's National Priorities List (NPL) in September 2015. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts referred the site to the EPA because the contaminated ground water plume is affecting nearby properties and wetlands, and contamination on the property poses a hazard to people that may come in contact with soil and debris. Other cleanup approaches were considered, but are not viable at this time because of the extent of contamination. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. The site was listed on EPA's National Priorities List (NPL) in September 2015.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
A Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) began September 2016. After a site is listed on the NPL, an RI/FS is performed at the site. The RI collects data to characterize site conditions, determine the nature and extent of contamination, assess risk to human health and the environment, and conduct treatability testing to evaluate treatment technologies that are being considered. The FS is utilized for the development, screening, and detailed evaluation of remedial alternatives being considered for the Site. Data collected during the RI influences the development of remedial alternatives for the FS. This phased approach encourages the continual scoping of the site characterization effort, which minimizes the collection of unnecessary data and maximizes data quality. Top of Page