ABERDEEN PROVING GROUND (EDGEWOOD AREA)EDGEWOOD, MD 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 13,000-acre Aberdeen Proving Ground (Edgewood Area Site) site is located in Edgewood, Maryland and includes Gunpowder Neck, Pooles Island, Carroll Island and Graces Quarters. Development and testing of chemical agent munitions took place at this federal facility site. From 1917 to the present, site activities have included conducting chemical research programs, manufacturing chemical agents, and testing, storage and disposal of toxic materials. Site activities contaminated soil, sediment, ground water and surface water with hazardous chemicals. EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1990. The U.S Army as the lead agency, is responsible for conducting investigations and cleanups at the facility, with EPA oversight and participation with Maryland Department of the Environment, as part of the Federal Facility Agreement (FFA). Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The U.S. Army entered into a Federal Facility Agreement (FFA) with EPA and as the lead agency, is responsible for conducting investigations and cleanups at the facility, with EPA oversight and participation with Maryland Department of the Environment. The FFA identified specific study areas within the Edgewood Area which include O-Field, J-Field, Canal Creek, Westwood, Carroll Island, Graces Quarters, Bush River, Lauderick Creek, and the Other Edgewood Area. These areas are further divided into operable units (OUs) for remedy selection/implementation.   The U.S. Army has completed Record of Decision (ROD) documents at thirty-four (34) OUs. A list of the decision documents, including RODs, completed with a summary of the remedy can be found in the Operable Units section. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Cleanup work is ongoing at several operable units. Current work at APG Edgewood includes several base-wide investigations in addition to work at the Canal Creek, Bush River, Graces Quarters, and the Lauderick Creek Study Areas. The U.S. Army, with EPA concurrence, has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedies. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review and addendums to the review, conducted in 2018, 2019 and 2021, concluded that the remedies are protective, with recommendations for additional actions at 6 OUs to ensure future protectiveness. EPA issued an independent determination of protectiveness deferred in December 2023. APG is expected to complete a FYR addendum by July 2025. For detailed information, see the current Five-Year Review and Addendums. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
At APG, Land use controls (LUCs) are in place at several operable units either through the formal CERCLA process or through a Post ROD action. For a detailed description of the LUCs at each operable unit please see Section 1.5.1 of the 2019 Five-Year Review Report Addendum (PDF, page 71). Top of Page