INDIAN HEAD NAVAL SURFACE WARFARE CENTERINDIAN HEAD, MD
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Indian Head Naval Surface Warfare Center is located in Indian Head, MD.  The Indian Head Naval Surface Warfare Center was established in 1890 as the Naval Proving Ground, with the mission of testing explosives and propellants. Over its 100-year history of operations, the facility has manufactured a variety of munitions and chemicals. Manufacturing, testing, loading and assembly operations at the site generated explosive, reactive and hazardous wastes. In the past, some of these waste products were routinely dumped into pits and landfills at the facility or burned in open burning grounds. Site activities also included the routine discharge of industrial wastewaters to septic systems, open ditches and storm sewers that emptied directly into surrounding water bodies. These activities contaminated soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. The Indian Head Naval Surface Water Center was added to the National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1995.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
This site is being addressed through federal actions. A December 2000 Federal Facilities Agreement (FFA) between EPA, the State of Maryland and the United States Navy identified areas for investigation and possible cleanup. The FFA provided the framework and a schedule to accomplish this work. Currently, there are 114 areas at the Indian Head Naval Surface Warfare Center being addressed under the Superfund program. EPA has signed Records of Decision (RODs) selecting remedies for 12 operable units including:
Site 11 – Caffee Road Landfill
Site 12 – Town Gut Landfill
“Lab Area” (Sites 14, 15, 16, 49, 50, 53, 54, and 55)
Site 17 – Disposed Metal Parts Along Shoreline
Site 21 – Bronson Road Landfill
Site 28 – Original Burning Ground
UXO 32 – Scrap Yard (formerly IRP Site 41)
Site 36 – Closed Landfill
Site 38 – Rum Point Landfill
Site 42 – Olsen Road Landfill
Site 47 – Mercuric Nitrate Disposal Area
Site 57 – TCE Building 292 Area
A full list of operable units can be viewed under the Operable Units section.

What Is the Current Site Status?
The United States Navy has the lead role for cleaning up the Indian Head Naval Surface Warfare Center NPL site. Per the Federal Facilities Agreement between EPA, the Maryland Department of the Environment and the United States Navy, a Site Management Plan (SMP) is annually updated with activities at each operable unit and area of concern. For detailed information on the current cleanup status, see Naval Support Facility Indian Head website. A full list of activities per each operable unit can be found under the Cleanup Progress section. Five-Year Review The lead agency conducts five-year reviews for remedies implemented. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent can be found here. The next five-year review is scheduled for 2022.
