ORDNANCE PRODUCTS, INC.NORTH EAST, MD 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Ordnance Products Inc. Site occupies approximately 95 acres in North East, Maryland. From 1957 to 1979, the site was occupied by a munitions manufacturing facility that produced, stored, and packaged grenade fuses, detonators, and related devices for the U.S. military. Waste from the manufacturing process was either buried on-site in open pits, discharged to five unlined surface impoundments, or buried. On-site groundwater, soil, and nearby water supply wells were impacted by chlorinated volatile organic compounds (VOCs), metals, and perchlorate, a chemical used in explosives manufacturing. The site was added to the Superfund program's National Priorities List in 1997. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) first investigated the site in 1987 and conducted additional sampling in 1988. This sampling revealed elevated levels of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). The soil, groundwater, and surface water at the site were impacted as a result of the historic munitions manufacturing operation. Munitions and explosives of concern had also remained on-site following closure of the facility. Additionally, residential wells near the site were affected by site-related contaminants. In 1988, MDE requested EPA's assistance to address contaminated areas at the site. The site was proposed to the Superfund National Priorities List (NPL) on May 10, 1993 and was formally added to the NPL on September 25, 1997. The Potentially Responsible Parties led several investigations and response actions from 1988 to 1997. When the site was added to the NPL, EPA assumed all short-term responsibilities for cleanup activities. Subsequent removal action activities, as well as operations and maintenance, ensued to address contaminated sediment in the surface water impoundments. A Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study took place from 1999 to 2005. This study formed the basis for the Record of Decision (PDF) signed on September 30, 2006. The selected cleanup remedy included: 
Maintain residential well treatment systems
Connect affected residences to a municipal drinking water supply
I﻿﻿nstall, operate, and maintain a groundwater treatment system
S﻿﻿creen and clear munitions and explosives of concern from on-site disposal areas
R﻿emove contaminated soils that pose unacceptable human health or ecological risk, and
Monitor g﻿roundwater and institutional controls. 
The selected remedy was implemented in two discrete remedial actions: soil and groundwater. The soil remedial design was completed in July 2010 and the soil remedial action was conducted from December 2010 through June 2011. The remedial action consisted of clearance and off-site disposal of munitions and explosives of concern from eight historic on-site disposal areas, off-site disposal or amendment of soil from select disposal areas, and backfilling and grading of excavations. EPA conducted a Pre-Design Investigation for the groundwater remedial action from 2008 through early 2013. A Record of Decision Amendment was issued in 2013 to modify the selected remedy in the 2006 Record of Decision. The 2013 Record of Decision Amendment (PDF) eliminated the installation of a water supply line, added long-term operation and maintenance of residential well treatment systems and vapor intrusion mitigation systems, and replaced groundwater extraction and treatment in a portion of the site with in-situ bioremediation. Construction of the groundwater remedial action began in 2014 and concluded in 2015. This marked a Construction Completion designation at the site, documented in the 2015 Preliminary Close-Out Report (PDF). 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Since 2015, EPA has been conducting long-term remedial action, including treatment and routine monitoring of on-site groundwater. Off-site groundwater is monitored on a quarterly basis. The Maryland Department of the Environment monitors and maintains treatment systems to ensure safe drinking water is provided to residents near the site. EPA conducts five-year reviews of the site’s remedy to ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent second 2020 Five-Year Review (PDF) addressed both the soil and groundwater remedial actions and concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. The next five-year review is scheduled for 2025. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in place to protect the remedies and restrict use of the soil and groundwater at the site. Additional information about the institutional controls are available in the 2020 Five-Year Review (PDF) (pages 13-4). 
Top of Page