Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Dwyer Property Groundwater Plume site is located north of the intersection of Maryland Route 545 (Blue Ball Road) and Maryland Route 279 (Elkton Road), in Elkton, Cecil County, Maryland. The site encompasses a portion of the former explosives manufacturing facilities known as Triumph Explosives and Aerial Products. This company manufactured products for the military. It has been inactive since 1972 and is currently abandoned and overgrown. The site consists of a two distinct groundwater plumes contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs). A specific source of the VOCs in the northern plume has been identified on the property; however, a specific source for the southwestern plume has not been identified. The VOC plumes were initially identified by the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE). MDE has performed a number of investigations at the site to try to determine the potential sources and extent of the plume. The Dwyer Property Groundwater Plume was added to the National Priorities List in March of 2011. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party actions. The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) first became involved at the site as a result of a real estate transaction. Based on the site's previous history as a munitions manufacturing plant, a complete groundwater investigation was recommended. As part of a Preliminary Assessment, three wells were installed. Analytical results of groundwater indicated high concentrations of chlorinated volatiles in the parts per million range. Successive investigations by MDE in the mid-1990s to 2005 expanded the areas of contamination. The MDE investigations primarily focused on trichloroethylene (TCE) in groundwater. In March 2010, MDE performed an expanded remedial investigation that discovered a dense non-aqueous chlorinated solvents source composed mainly of TCE. Over the years of investigation, MDE installed a total of 74 monitoring wells, 12 piezometers, 36 soil borings and five stream gauging stations. The Dwyer Property Groundwater Plume was proposed to the National Priorities List on October 21, 2010 and finalized on the list in March of 2011. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA conducted fund-lead remedial investigation activities between 2014 and 2016. These activities included: 
Preparation of work plans, surface water sediment sampling on Dogwood Run and Little Elk Creek,
Subsurface investigations of volatile organic compounds, mainly trichloroethylene (TCE), source areas,
And a monitoring well survey. 
In February 2016, EPA issued an order for Honeywell to perform a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study at the Dwyer Superfund Site. Honeywell is the Potentially Responsible Party and successor to Triumph Explosives. EPA partially approved Honeywell's Remedial Investigation work plan in November 2016 for non-intrusive field activities. Field activities performed in 2016 included a munitions and explosives of concern (MEC) survey, reconnaissance of 214 potential areas of interest, and seismic surveys. EPA approved Honeywell's Remedial Investigation work plan in August 2018 to perform intrusive field activities. Between 2018 and 2022, there were three phases of investigation at approximately 100 potential areas of interest. The investigations consisted of MEC surveys, soil sampling in test pits, and shallow soil borings. The remaining 115 potential areas of interest are planned for the Phase 4 investigation in 2023. During the Phase 1 groundwater investigation, 48 wells were installed between February and November of 2019. This consisted of 28 on-site wells, 18 off-site wells, and two on-site background wells. A total of 113 monitoring wells were sampled during the Phase 1 Remedial Investigation, including 91 on-site, 20 off-site, and two on-site background wells. Five surface water locations were also sampled along Dogwood Run in 2019.  As part of the 2021 Phase 2 groundwater investigation, 12 more monitoring wells were installed. The monitoring well network, consisting of 128 wells were sampled for volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semi-volatile compounds (SVOCs), total metals, hexavalent chromium, perchlorate, and nitroaromatics/amines. Surface water and sediment samples were collected during high water flows on Dogwood Run Creek and Little Elk Creek. In November and December 2022, the Phase 3 sitewide groundwater monitoring took place. The complete monitoring well network (128 wells) was sampled for VOCs, SVOCs, total metals, hexavalent chromium, perchlorate, and nitroaromatics/amines. Several field sampling events are planned for 2023. These planned events include underground storage tank/vault removals, the Phase 4 sitewide groundwater monitoring, surface water/sediment sampling, a groundwater/surface water Interaction Study at Little Elk Creek, and the Phase 4 groundwater source investigation. The Phase 4 groundwater source investigation will involve: 
MEC surveys,
seismic surveys,
installation of approximately five more monitoring wells,
subsurface geophysics,
and direct push sampling for VOCs. 
Surface water and sediment samples are also planned for Dogwood Run and Little Elk Creek. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The site is currently zoned for business industrial uses.
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
In 2011, EPA emergency response personnel collected well water samples from a residential well at houses near the site. EPA also collected soil, groundwater, and soil gas samples near Rudy Park public housing units. Results from the sampling did not reveal the presence of site-related contamination. In the fall of 2012, EPA personnel conducted an unexploded ordnance (UXO) survey in an area of the site used for waste disposal. The survey did not reveal the presence of UXO in the survey area. However, surficial UXO has been found at other locations across the site. EPA also performed a removal site evaluation in 2012 that identified a release and threatened release of hazardous substances from two principal source areas. These source areas included a collapsed building area where there were piles of residual substances scattered around that were once contained by drums, and an area where deteriorated drums were unearthed during the installation of a sewer line along Dogwood Creek. These drums contained residual substances and other unknown materials. Analytical results indicated that these sources were releasing elevated concentrations of lead and arsenic into the environment. In 2016, the potentially responsible party removed the drums, hazardous substances and contaminated soils under the supervision of an EPA On-Scene Coordinator. A combined total of approximately 233 cubic yards of waste material and surface soil was removed from the two areas at the site and disposed of off-site. All areas were properly backfilled and restored by December 22, 2016. Top of Page