BEAR CREEK SEDIMENTSSPARROWS POINT, MD
  Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
Bear Creek is a tidal surface water body adjacent to the 3,100-acre Sparrows Point peninsula, which was the site of steelmaking and ship building industries. The Bethlehem Steel Corporation (BSC) was the primary owner and operator for much of the Sparrows Point operational history between 1887 and 2013. More than 100 years of steelmaking left behind a legacy of contamination on both land and in the waters surrounding the Peninsula. Sediments in Bear Creek were contaminated primarily by the migration of hazardous substances from the steel making process, and the discharges from process wastewater and stormwater that discharged to Bear Creek.  The EPA Site Team recorded a video presentation about the Bear Creek Sediments Site NPL proposal.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Land sources of contamination are being addressed by the current owner of the facility under Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) and EPA oversight under other cleanup programs and are not included as part of this site. The Tin Mill Canal, which is a major source of contamination to Bear Creek, has undergone extensive removal of contamination and capping to ensure contaminants no longer have the potential to migrate off-site. There have been no response activities associated with the offshore sediments in Bear Creek.   Read more about the EPA and MDE onshore cleanup of the Sparrows Point Peninsula.  
What Is the Current Site Status?
On March 16, 2022﻿, EPA added the Bear Creek sediments site to the National Priorities List, a list of the sites eligible for long-term cleanup financed under the federal Superfund Program. The next step in the Superfund process will be a full investigation of the site and the nature and extent of the contamination. EPA will continue to keep the community and stakeholders informed and involved in the development of a cleanup plan that protects public health and the environment. On September 25, 2024, EPA signed the Action Memorandum to select a removal action to address the hazardous substances (including, PCBs and metals) commingled with oil and grease found in the contaminated sediment of the Bear Creek Superfund Site. Pre-design investigations will occur to inform the Removal Action design. EPA anticipates the pre-design investigations will begin in early 2025 and will take approximately 12-18 months, the design for the Removal Action will take approximately 1 year, and the Removal Action itself will take approximately two years. Learn more about the Superfund Cleanup process.   
