Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1987.﻿ The former Brunswick Naval Air Station in Brunswick, Maine, closed in May 2011 under the federal Defense Base Realignment and Closure Act of 2005. Wastes generated by the U.S. Navy when the base was an active military installation have contaminated soil and ground water across portions of the former air station. An October 1990 agreement established the responsibilities of the Navy, the Maine Department of Environmental Protection and EPA in studying contamination at the site and cleaning the former base’s roughly 3,100 acres﻿, and the Navy continues to conduct site contaminant investigations and cleanup activities. Recent contaminant investigations have included sampling existing public and private drinking water supplies located on- and off-base for per- & polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). These chemicals were used in the formation of aircraft firefighting foams that were historically used by the Navy when Brunswick was an active air station.  Results of this sampling identified two PFAS, perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctyl sulfonate (PFOS) at levels below or slightly above laboratory detection levels for these two chemicals. All reported supply well concentrations were also below lifetime health advisories established by EPA for these two chemicals.  The Navy is currently investigating areas on the base where these firefighting foams were historically stored and potentially discharged to the environment in order to confirm whether or not these chemicals are present in the environment. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal actions. EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1987.﻿ An October 1990 agreement established the responsibilities of the Navy, the Maine Department of Environmental Protection and EPA in studying contamination at the site and cleaning the former base’s roughly 3,100 acres. Direct contact threats on the base have been eliminated through numerous Navy cleanup actions. The Navy has spent over $100 million investigating and cleaning the site and has transferred more than 2,700 acres of the base to parties including the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority, the Town of Brunswick, Bowdoin College, and Southern Maine Community College. Operation of the ground water extraction and treatment system for the Eastern Plume site continues along with long-term environmental monitoring of the Eastern Plume and other identified sites. Cleanup plans for Site 12 - Former Explosive Ordnance Disposal Area and the Former Quarry Area were finalized in 2015 and 2017, respectively. Ongoing studies are also being conducted by the Navy to evaluate the presence or absence of PFAS on the former station. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Early Cleanup Efforts: In 1994, the Navy took more than 1,000 cubic yards of pesticide-contaminated soil from a former pesticide storage and mixing area off site for incineration. At the former base fire-training site, contaminated soil and buried drums were also excavated and taken off the base for treatment and disposal. The following areas each had their own cleanup plans. Sites 1 and 3, Orion Street Landfill North & Hazardous Waste Burial Area: In 1996, the Navy built a 12-acre double barrier landfill cap, a 2,220-foot subsurface barrier wall to divert ground water away from the capped landfill area, and a ground water extraction and treatment system to lower ground water beneath the cap so landfill wastes were no longer in contact with ground water. In late 1997, the extraction wells were shut down because ground water levels had dropped below a significant amount of the buried landfill waste. Routine monitoring is ongoing. In 2017, the Sites 1 and 3 landfill cap was extended over a 1.5 acre portion of the former landfill that previously had not been capped due to its location within the air station's active weapons storage area. Eastern Plume Site: Interim ground water cleanup began in May 1995. A final cleanup plan in February 1998 included continued ground water extraction and treatment to contain contaminated ground water with the ultimate goal of restoring ground water quality to drinking water standards. In 2000, a change in the methods used to treat the extracted ground water improved the removal of contaminants and also reinjected treated ground water back into the aquifer. Site controls to prevent the use of ground water during cleanup were included in the 2000 plan modifications. A supplemental ground water investigation in 2010 delineated the extent of the chemical compound 1,4-dioxane within the Eastern Plume site. Based on this and earlier data, changes were made in the ground water treatment process used to remove Eastern Plume contaminants, including 1,4-dioxane, from extracted ground water. Extracted ground water is now treated by an advanced oxidation process followed by activated carbon treatment. More extraction wells were also added to the system. The Navy routinely monitors Eastern Plume ground water quality and performance of the treatment system to assess cleanup progress.  As a result of PFAS being detected in Eastern Plume ground water, the Navy has optimized the activated carbon treatment component of the ground water treatment system to ensure effective removal of PFAS from the extracted ground water.  Ongoing treatment system operations monitoring of treated ground water has confirmed that PFOA and PFOS concentrations are at levels below laboratory minimum detection limits. Site 8 Perimeter Road Landfill: Cleanup, completed in 1995, included excavation of contaminated soils and transportation of the soils to Sites 1 and 3 before the landfill cap was put in place. Sites 5 and 6: Cleanup of these sites, completed in 1995, included removal of soil, construction debris and asbestos-containing materials; encapsulation of asbestos-containing pipes in two layers of polyethylene; and transportation of all materials to Sites 1 and 3 before the landfill cap was in place. Neptune Drive Disposal Area (Site 9): Interim cleanup actions included long-term monitoring of ground water, surface water and sediments. A final cleanup plan, completed in 1999, called for long-term ground water quality monitoring to document the expected natural degradation of low-level chlorinated solvent contamination. Numerous studies assessed environmental impacts from an old ash dump beneath former Navy barracks demolished in 2005. The ash was generated by a waste incinerator at the site. From 2006 to 2008, about 42,000 tons of ash and soil were excavated and taken off base for disposal. Studies have been completed to delineate residual buried ash at the site. The Navy is currently evaluating the potential future health risks associated with this residual subsurface ash materials in order to determine whether current land use restrictions are adequate to ensure safe future use of the site. A 2012 Navy review of base records concerning the historical use and potential disposal of radium-containing items required the Navy to do a radiological contaminant survey of this area as well as the Orion Street Landfill South, Site 4, Site 7, and the Former Quarry Site.  Subsequent radiological screenings of these sites identified no impacts from identified radiological contaminants of concern. Orion Street Landfill South (Site 2): Visible metal debris was removed from the surface of this landfill and its land contours were regraded and stabilized. In 1998, a cleanup plan requiring long-term monitoring and land use controls was selected. Additional studies completed by the Navy in 2011 for an area north of the site identified additional debris that required the Navy to similarly cover and manage this debris. The extension of the Site 2 cover was completed in 2014. Sites 4, 11, and 13: At Site 11, the former fire training area, cleanup work addressed storage drums, contaminated soil, and an underground storage tank. Underground storage tanks at Sites 4 and 13 were also removed. After these actions, no further cleanup was required. Contamination released in the past that has since traveled in ground water away from the site is being addressed through ground water extraction and treatment cleanup work for the Eastern Plume site. Site 7: Limited removal of cadmium-contaminated soil finished in 2001 to reduce the level of this metal in site ground water. Since 2001, cadmium concentrations in ground water have not fallen as expected. Recent studies of site soils by the Navy have identified additional cadmium contamination that will be targeted for future removal. In 2017, the Navy excavated approximately 2,200 tons of cadmium-contaminated soil and consolidated it under the Sites 1 and 3 Landfill cap extension. Site 17: The Navy removed pesticide-contaminated soils and took them for off-base treatment and disposal. After site studies in 2010, the Navy disposed of additional pesticide-contaminated soils off base. After these soil cleanup efforts, the Navy decided no additional soil removal was necessary. The Navy continues to assess ground water quality at the site to assess the expected reduction of low-level pesticides concentrations over time. Site 12: The Navy used this area to detonate reported small quantities of explosive ordnance until 2004. Since 2009, studies have been underway to identify and remove any items that may present an explosive safety hazard as well as to evaluate any environmental impacts from ordnance-containing explosive chemical compounds. The Navy completed all ordnance clearance activities as well as contaminant studies between 2009 and 2015.  The Navy's final 2015 cleanup plan required no further action to address site soil, sediment, surface water, and ground water contaminants identified at the site. Although unlikely, the Navy's cleanup plan also required the establishment of land use controls to limit the future disturbance of subsurface soils at the site. Former Quarry Site: This area of the base, besides its use as a source of stone construction material, was also reportedly used for the detonation of explosive ordnance and disposal of debris. Between 2009 and 2017, the Navy completed concurrent munitions clearance activities as well as site contaminant studies to determine the nature and extent of impacts from historical Navy activities at the site.  The Navy's final 2017 cleanup plan required the placement of a soil cover over a portion of site and the establishment of land use controls to prohibit disturbance of the soil cover and the subsurface soils beneath the cover. Picnic Pond: Initially evaluated as part of base-wide contaminant studies in 1990, the Navy began a re-evaluation of the Picnic Pond drainage system in 2015.  The Navy's decision to reassess the environmental condition of the Picnic Pond drainage system was to significantly update and expand historical surface water and sediment contaminant datasets now that the air station is closed. ﻿Navy's investigations are ongoing. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.  This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The matrix below is a general summary of the restrictions at this site at the date of this report. The information in this matrix is a general description of the restrictions at the site only. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site. The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above. Note that where multiple entries occur, it will impact more than one pathway. Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remain onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use. Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found on the site profile page, in the Institutional Control instruments collection of documents, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page