Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Callahan Mining Corp site is located about 1,000 feet east-southeast of Harborside Village in Brooksville, Hancock County, Maine. Zinc-copper sulfide ore deposits at the Site were discovered in 1880.  The mine operated from the late 1800s until its closure in 1972 when the Callahan Mining Corporation (Callahan) divested the property to individual landowners.  The ore exploration from the 1940s to 1950s found the ore contained zinc, copper, lead, arsenic, and cadmium.  In the 1960s, the State of Maine passed legislation which permitted creating and constructing two dams in 1967 that were used to drain the 75 acre Goose Pond estuary and thereby allow open pit mining.  The main period of operation was from 1968 to 1972. The Site’s former Callahan Mine property is an elongated 120 acre property oriented north-south along the east side of Goose Falls Road.  The Site also includes the Goose Pond estuary (approximately 75 acres) and private properties that abut the former Callahan Mine property to the north, west, and south.  The Site is situated at 44° 21’ 05.9” north latitude and 68° 48’ 35.5” west longitude.  Goose Pond and Holbrook Island Sanctuary State Park are located immediately east of the former Callahan Mine property.  A number of private residences and seasonal homes are located adjacent to the former Callahan Mine property on Goose Falls Road, Cape Rosier Road, and Old Mine Lane. Privately held properties border the Site’s former Callahan Mine property to the north, west and the south. The Site currently consists of a submerged open pit, the former mine operations area, a series of waste rock piles, and a tailings impoundment.  The three waste rock piles contain about 1.7 million cubic yards of waste rock that was removed to access the ore in the open pit.  The former mine operations area including the crushing and flotation operations as well as the administrative and maintenance facilities.  The tailings impoundment has a 21 acre footprint, including the rock buttress, and contains about 700,000 cubic yards of tailings.  Portions of the Site that include waste rock, tailings, access roads, ore, or mine operations remnants encompass approximately 75 acres.  The areas with waste rock or tailings are for the most part un-vegetated and barren.  The Goose Pond estuary was drained during mining operations.  Portions of the estuary were used as a settling basin for flotation mill effluent.  The former open pit mine now resides within the estuary.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 2004, EPA began the Remedial Investigation (RI) and Feasibility Study (FS) at the Site.  EPA initially began the RI/FS as a fund-lead activity.  In 2005, EPA signed an Administrative Order by Consent (AOC) to allow the State of Maine to complete the RI/FS.  Prior to the issuance of a Proposed Plan for OU1 in July 2009, the OU1 RI/FS was completed.  On September 30, 2009, EPA signed the OU1 Record of Decision (ROD) selecting the cleanup remedy for OU1.  At the time of the OU1 ROD in 2009, EPA determined that additional investigation would be necessary to finalize a cleanup plan for the groundwater and the waste/soil located outside of the OU1 ROD defined source areas and created Operable Unit 2 (OU2).  The OU2 RI/FS will continue until sufficient data are collected to develop a cleanup plan for those areas.  The OU2 RI/FS is being performed by the State of Maine in accordance with the 2005 RI/FS AOC. In 2010, EPA separated the OU1 ROD components into two operable units.  The cleanup actions relating to the Residential Use Area soil and the PCB contamination in the Mine Operations Area along with any other associated activities remained as part of OU1. The remaining components of the OU1 ROD are to be performed as part of OU3 In August 2010, EPA entered into a Settlement Agreement with the State of Maine Department of Transportation (Maine DOT) for the implementation of the remedial design of OU1 and OU3.  Under the AOC, the Maine DOT is also responsible for the completion of the OU2 RI/FS.  The OU1 Remedial Design was completed in September 2010.  The Tailings Impoundment component of the OU3 Remedial Design was completed in August 2015.  The sediment, waste rock, and CAD cell component of the OU3 Remedial Design is ongoing. In August 2010, EPA and the Maine DEP entered into a State Superfund Contract for the OU1 selected remedy, including both the OU1 and OU3.  In September 2010, EPA entered into a Cooperative Agreement with the Maine DEP to allow them to become the lead for the implementation of the OU1 Remedial Action.  The Cooperative Agreement was amended in July 2012, December 2012, and May 2013 to provide additional funding for the OU1 Remedial Action.  In 2015, EPA entered into a Cooperative Agreement with MEDEP to allow them to become the lead for the installation of the horizontal drain and passive treatment system. The OU1 remedial action began in September 2010.  The cleanup of the Residential Use Area was completed in 2011.  The cleanup of the PCB contamination in the Mine Operations Area was completed in September 2013.  The entire OU1 Remedial Action was completed by September 30, 2013. The remedial design for the tailings impoundment component of the OU3 remedy was completed in August 2015.  The first component of the tailings impoundment component of the OU3 remedy was the installation of a horizontal drain to lower the water level within the tailings impoundment and a passive treatment system to remove contaminants from the discharge from the horizontal drain.  The horizontal drain and associated passive treatment system were completed in fall 2015. The installation of a buttress along the toe of the Tailings Dam was completed in August 2020 and the lowering of the Tailings Dam was completed in November 2020. As part of the lowering of the Tailings Dam, some of the tailings behind the Tailings Dam were excavated and consolidated to another area of the Tailings Impoundment. A cover system with a low permeability geomembrane and geocomposite drainage layer was installed in 2021. The remedial design for the sediment and waste rock excavation and placement in the CAD cell was completed in September 2019. During 2022 and 2023, EPA removed clean former Goose Pond sediment that was placed in a repository adjacent to Waste Rock Pile #1 as a result of the mining operations. Also, during 2022 and 2023, Waste Rock Pile #3 was excavated and consolidated at Waste Rock Pile #1 filling the void created by the removal of the Goose Pond sediment. The area where the Waste Rock Pile #3 material was excavated was graded, covered with topsoil, and seeded. In 2023, the excvation of the contaminated salt marsh, wetlands and Goose Pond was initiated. This work will continue into 2024.
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA is performing the work to stabilize and install a cover system over the Tailings Impoundment. This work is expected to be completed in 2021. The Remedial Design for the sediment component of the OU3 cleanup action was completed in September 2019. EPA continues to implement the tailings impoundment closure component of the OU3 cleanup action. In October/November 2019, the slope inclinometers were installed in advance of the tailings dam stabilization. The installation of a stone buttress to stabilize the Tailing Dam was completed in 2020 and a cover system over the Tailing Impoundment was installed in 2021. The Waste Rock #3 mine was excavated and consolidated at Waste Rock Pile #1. EPA began excavation of contaminated salt marsh and Goose Pond sediments in 2023. EPA will continue to excvate the contaminated Goose Pond sediments in 2024 and will aslo install a subaqueous cover over the contaminated material in Dyer Cove. The final capping of Waste Rock Pile #1 along with the conolidated material from Waste Rock Pile #3 and the salt marsh and Goose Pond sediment will be capped in the future.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remain onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of documents, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted.
Sampling and Monitoring
EPA performed sampling of the surface water, groundwater, and seeps during 2020 and residential well sampling in 2021.
