Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 7-acre McKin Co. site is located in a rural residential area in Gray, Maine. After a sand and gravel pit operated on site, a facility opened in 1965 for the storage and disposal of liquid wastes. The facility expanded in 1972 to accommodate waste generated when a Norwegian tanker ran aground on a ledge in Hussey Sound, a shipping channel in Casco Bay, spilling 100,000 gallons of industrial fuel. Between 1965 and 1978, the plant handled and disposed of a mixture of solvents, oils and other chemicals. Operating facilities included an incinerator, a concrete block building, an asphalt-lined lagoon, and storage and fuel tanks. Wastes also may have been disposed of by spreading them over the ground surface. About 100,000 to 200,000 gallons of waste are thought to have been processed annually. As early as 1973, residents of East Gray reported odors in well water and discoloration of laundry. In 1977, EPA confirmed that contaminated groundwater had reached many local private wells. These water supplies were capped, and the Farmers Home Administration trucked in water supplies. The public water system was extended to the affected area in 1978, and all residents were connected to it. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Source remediation was completed and a groundwater ordinance zone prohibits any use of groundwater. An environmental covenant for the site property has been recorded. Long-term protectiveness of the remedy requires abandonment of residential wells within the groundwater ordinance zone. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy for soil contamination included aeration of the soil and off-site disposal of 16 drums. Thermal soil aeration reduced contaminant levels in 12,000 cubic yards of soils to safe levels. The site’s long-term remedy for groundwater contamination included groundwater extraction and treatment, monitoring, site closure (demolishing buildings, clearing debris, draining and filling in the lagoon, removing drums and other contaminated materials), fencing the site, and covering the site with soil and vegetation. Soil cleanup began in July 1986 and was completed in June 1987. Construction of a groundwater extraction and treatment system was completed in September 1990. EPA updated the site’s groundwater remedy in 2001. With the determination that it was technically impracticable to use groundwater pumping and aboveground treatment to achieve the goal of groundwater restoration, EPA selected overlapping institutional controls with long-term monitoring to maintain protectiveness of human health. The 2001 remedy also included an engineered covering of an area known as Boiling Springs to prevent exposure to contaminated water by environmental receptors, and a contingency remedy for the Royal River. All institutional controls have been implemented including: a restrictive covenant recorded on the McKin Company property; a Town of Gray ordinance prohibiting the use of groundwater within a designated area surrounding the site; restrictive covenants on 21 sub-dividable properties within the designated area; and two conservation easements along Collyer Brook and its confluence with the Royal River. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
  This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of document, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Long-term monitoring continues and the most recent Five-Year Review indicates that the contaminant levels continue to decrease in the groundwater. Sampling of the Royal River shows that the River has been meeting the applicable water quality standard since 2009.
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Site cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In 1979, the state removed 33,500 gallons of wastes and 165 drums of oils and chemicals. From 1985 to 1987, the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) removed 55-gallon drums from the site. A fence surrounding the process area facilities was repaired, and a similar fence installed across the front of the facility to prevent unauthorized access. Monitoring wells were also installed. Other actions included cleaning the tanks, transporting the empty tanks off site for salvage, and transporting liquids and sludge off site for disposal. The state cleaned and removed all remaining aboveground tanks in 1985. Top of Page