Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 212-acre Saco Tannery Waste Pits site is located in Saco, Maine. Saco Tannery Corporation operated from 1959 until 1981, when the company filed for bankruptcy and stopped operations. The Waste Pits site, located about four miles north of the tannery, was used as a disposal area for process wastes such as chromium sludges, acid wastes, methylene chloride and caustic substances. It is estimated that more than 23 million gallons of wastes were deposited in two lagoons and 53 disposal pits. After immediate actions to protect human health and the environment, the site’s long-term remedy was put in place. EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1999.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal and state actions. In 1983, EPA performed a removal action that included the removal of liquid wastes, neutralization of sludges, capping of three pits, and erected a fence along Flag Pond Road to prevent vehicular traffic into the site. Long-term remedial action was performed in two phases with the first phase, site preparation begun and completed in the fall of 1992. The second phase began in March 1993 and was completed in October 1993. It included the construction of soil cover systems for the fifty-three waste pits, two lagoons, plus two areas outside the waste pits; re-vegetating the site; creating compensatory wetlands; and constructing permanent security fencing. In addition to the soil covers, the remedy required the creation of on-site wetlands as compensation for the wetlands permanently lost with the construction of the soil covers. Investigation in 1991-1992 found insufficient suitable acreage on-site to offset the acreage lost through the remediation. Consequently, EPA and Maine DEP explored off-site options. The agencies contacted The Nature Conservancy who identified the Saco Heath, located within two miles of the site and within the same watershed.  Maine DEP took the lead in the negotiations, culminating in the purchase of 247 acres of a unique and threatened habitat. For further details on this environmental result, see the 1993 EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES (ESD) (11 pp, 800 K, About PDF). The State of Maine has assumed operation and maintenance responsibilities for the site.
What Is the Current Site Status?
Construction of all cleanup remedies finished in 1993. After cleanup, EPA took the site off the NPL in 1999. Long-term monitoring continues as do Five-Year Reviews. The last review, completed in 2014, found the remedy was protective of human health and the environment because the remedy is functioning as designed. Institutional controls restrict future use of the Site and the groundwater. However, in order for the remedy to be protective in the long-term, the 2014 review stated a solution was needed to prevent ongoing vandalism of the interior fencing and gates, and an evaluation of potential sediment toxicity to aquatic organisms should be performed. In 2017, sediment toxicity testing with associated chemical analysis was performed. The toxicity testing did not identify any toxicity to benthic organisms in the Stuart Brook drainage adjacent to the Site, and chemical analysis immediately downstream of the area potentially affected by groundwater seeps indicates that conditions are stable and do not present a risk to benthic organisms.
The 2019 Five-Year Review concluded that the remedy currently protects human health and the environment because the soil cover system and effective implementation of institutional controls prohibiting development and use of Site groundwater has prevented exposure to Site soils and groundwater.  However, in order for the remedy to be protective in the long-term, timely completion and reporting of required monitoring must occur. The next Five-Year Review is scheduled to be conducted in 2024.﻿
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site. This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
