Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Green Remediation
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Keddy Mill Superfund Site (the “Site”) consists of a 6.93-acre abandoned mill complex property, located at 7 Depot Street (the Mill Complex Property), an adjacent reach of the Presumpscot River, and associated riparian properties in the Little Falls Village portion of Windham, Maine. The Site is located in a mixed commercial/residential area. It is bounded by Depot Street to the north, a former Maine Central Railroad right-of-way to the east, undeveloped property and the Presumpscot River to the south, and by Route 202/Main Street and an operational hydroelectric facility to the west. The Site is currently vacant and is largely covered with a two-story concrete/brick industrial mill building constructed on a concrete/soil foundation with a full basement level. This building was reportedly constructed in the early 1900s. The Site formerly contained several other industrial buildings which have since been demolished. Access to a signficant portion of the Mill Complex Property is restricted by a chain-link fence encompassing the northern portion of the parcel as well as the mill complex buildings; however, trespassers are understood to periodically enter the mill complex despite ongoing deterrence efforts. There are no known private drinking water sources (i.e., drilled water supply wells) located at or impacted by the Site. Mills were established on both sides of the Little Falls of the Presumpscot River as early as the 1750s, with a sawmill built on the Windham side (general vicinity of the Site) sometime before 1756. The sawmill ceased operations in 1822 and the property was used as a grist and carding mill. In 1875, the Sebago Wood Board Company acquired the mill site and constructed a pulp mill complex, which included a three-story main mill building, machine room, drying rooms, and a wood preparing house. Between the late 1800s and 1922 additional process buildings/facilities were added, including storehouses, a second railroad siding, the finishing and shipping building, a water tank, machine room, and engine room. The mill was used for pulp and box-board manufacturing through the 1940s. By 1945, the complex shifted from manufacturing paper to steel products (e.g., heavy equipment buckets). Scrap metal was transported by rail cars to the mill and melted into steel billets, which were then used to manufacture steel parts. During the 1960s and early 1970s, manufacturing included flanges and fire suppression materials. It was during this period that significant disposal of hazardous substances, including PCBs, may have occurred at the Site. The Keddy Mill Company began their metal manufacturing operation in the 1960s which continued into the 1970s. Through the process of transforming scrap metal into products, electrical capacitors and transformers containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were utilized. A large oil-based fire in late 1969 heavily damaged the mill complex and destroyed several blast furnaces. In 1974, a scrap recycler began operations in the mill building. The property appeared to be lightly used as a machine shop and equipment storage up until approximately 1997. Environmental investigations were initiated in the 1990s by various owners of the Keddy Mill property. EPA completed a Preliminary Assessment (PA) in March 2012 and a Site Inspection (SI) in January 2013. Information from the SI was used to score the Site under the Hazard Ranking System (HRS), which determined the Site to eligible for placement on the National Priorities List (NPL). The Site was proposed for addition to the NPL in December 2013 and the listing was finalized in May 2014. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Site has and is being addressed in two stages: initial actions and a long-term remedial phase focusing on cleanup of the entire Site. Initial Action: Environmental investigations largely began in the early 1990s. Data collected during these investigations, as well a fuel oil spill, resulted in two cleanup actions at the Site. In 1997, an action to remove nearly 11 tons of petroleum impacted soil from the north-central portion of the property was conducted in accordance with Maine Department of Environmental Protection (MEDEP) requirements. In 2010, a second cleanup action removed accessible PCB-contaminated fuel oils in piping and PCB-contaminated sludge, dirt, debris, and oil materials within the buildings. This work was completed consistent with a Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) Phase I Self-Implementing Cleanup Plan (SICP) approved by EPA. Entire Site: The Site was added to the NPL (Superfund list) on May 12, 2014. A Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) was initiated in 2015 with the overarching goals of determining the nature and extent of contamination and the risks posed to human health and the environment, and evaluate alternative cleanup measures if necessary. The Draft-Final RI Report (November 2021), Human Health Risk Assessment documentation (June 2023), Ecological Risk Assessment documentation (June 2023) and Draft-Final FS Report (June 2023) were made available to the public in support of the Proposed Plan for the Site. The Proposed Plan, also released to the public in June 2023, documented EPA's evaluation of remedial alternatives and the rationale for the selection of EPA's preferred cleanup alternative for the Site.  Following a 30-day public comment period, the selected response actions for the Site were documented in a Record of Decision (ROD) signed on September 28, 2023. EPA’s cleanup plan is anticipated to take approximately 2 to 4 years to design and execute and will be implemented following the substantial completion of an EPA-authorized Non-Time-Critical Removal Action to demolish the mill complex and associated structures. EPA’s cleanup plan generally includes the following components: 
Excavation and off-site disposal of approximately 22,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil and debris from the Mill Complex Property;
Targeted treatment of soil (within the footprint of the excavation) with amendments in support of groundwater cleanup;
In situ (in place) treatment of groundwater to reduce the mass, mobility and toxicity of contaminants;
Excavation and off-site disposal of approximately 320 cubic yards of contaminated sediments from the Presumpscot River;
Treatment of water generated from soil and sediment dewatering and removed from excavations based on applicable water discharge standards, as required;
Restoration of the portions of the Presumpscot River riverbed, riverbank, wetland and floodplain habitat altered by the remedial action;
Land use restrictions (called “Institutional Controls” or ICs) to prevent exposure to Site-related contaminants in groundwater and fish tissue until cleanup levels are met;
Inspections and operation and maintenance (O&M);
Monitoring of groundwater and fish tissue to evaluate the achievement of cleanup levels; and
Five-Year Reviews to assess the protectiveness of the remedy. 
The estimated total cost of this remedy, including construction, operation and maintenance, and long-term monitoring, is approximately $17 million Removal Action: An Action Memorandum for a Non-time Critical Removal Action (NTCRA) was signed by EPA in 2018. This interim cleanup action requires the demolition and removal of the mill complex. The primary building contaminants which have been determined to exceed acceptable human health standards include polychorinated biphenals (PCBs) and asbestos. The NTCRA decision was based on existing data and supported by an Engineering Evaluation/Cost Analysis (EE/CA) approved in 2018. A geotechnical investigation and drainage study data summary report was finalized by the Potentially Responsible Party (PRP) in January 2022. Pursuant to a Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent (AOC) effective October 2019, the investigation was completed to address data gaps and support future design activities. Consistent with the AOC signed in 2022 to demolish the mill complex, pre-design investigation (PDI) activities were completed in 2024 and a PDI Report is anticipated to be submitted in early 2025. The results of the PDI will support development of the design to demolish and remove the mill complex. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Remedial Process: The RI Report, including the associated human health and ecological risk assessments, and FS Report were made available to the public concurrent with the Proposed Plan, documenting EPA's evaluation of remedial alternatives and selection of a preferred alternative, in June 2023. Following a 30-day public comment period, the selected response actions for the Site were documented in a Record of Decision (ROD) signed on September 28, 2023. EPA’s cleanup plan is anticipated to take approximately 2 to 4 years to design and execute and will be implemented following the substantial completion of an EPA-authorized Non-Time-Critical Removal Action to demolish the mill complex and associated structures. Removal Action: Consistent with the AOC signed in 2022, the PRP is currently developing plans for the implementation of various investigations which are necessary in advance of the mill's demolition. Data collection was completed in 2024 and submittal of a PDI Report is anticipated in early 2025. The results of these investigations will be evaluated and ultimately support the design of the demolition and removal activities. Following approval of the design, the removal action will be implemented by the PRP. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use. Activity and use limitations, that EPA refers to as Institutional Controls or ICs, play an important role in Site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use. They also guide human behavior. The selected remedy documented in the Record of Decision (ROD) requires Institutional Controls to limit exposure to (1) contaminated groundwater and associated vapor that pose threats to future residents and construction workers until groundwater cleanup levels are achieved, and (2) fish tissue within the segment of the Presumpscot River between Little Falls (upstream) and Mallison Falls (downstream) until riks-based standards are achieved. EPA will work with various stakeholders to formally implement the required Institutional Controls for the Site; however, due to the presence of PCBs in sediments resulting in impacts to fish tissue, EPA advises against consumption of fish from the "Target Reach" of the Presumpscot River (i.e., the segment of the river between Little Falls and Mallison Falls) until a comprehensive remedial action is completed. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
The selected remedy documented in the Record of Decision (ROD) requires periodic monitoring of groundwater and fish tissue within a portion of the Presumpscot River to evlaute the achievement of cleanup levels. Long-term monitoring activities and results will be documented as part of EPA's required Five-Year Review process.
Top of Page
Green Remediation
EPA considered relevant climate change impacts (e.g., flooding and extreme weather events) and the principles of greener cleanups during the analysis of remedial alternatives dcoumented in the Draft-Final Feasibility Study Report (June 2023) and Proposed Plan (June 2023). Such factors will continue to be considered during the remedial design and remedy implementation.
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
As noted above a Non Time Critical Removal Action (NTCRA) will be implemented by the PRP, under the oversight of EPA and MEDEP, to demolish and remove the mill complex from the Site. PDI sampling was completed in 2024 and submittal of a PDI Report is anticipatedin early 2025.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
EPA’s Removal Program conducted sampling of the derelict mill complex in November 2015 and March 2016. The results indicated polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in concrete and wood with a concentration as high as 24,000 parts per million (“ppm”), PCBs in window putty as high as 12 ppm, and asbestos containing materials (ACM) with asbestos content as high as 20%. EPA completed a Removal Program Preliminary Investigation/Site Assessment Report in July 2016. A Site Investigation Closure Memorandum was signed in July 2016, which recommended a Removal Action. The following provides a briefy chronology of EPA's enforcement-related activities: 
EPA signed an approval in April 2017 for the PRP to perform an EE/CA for a NTCRA to evaluate options for addressing the mill complex at the Site.
PRP performed the EE/CA under an AOC and the Action Memorandum for the NTCRA was issued by EPA in September 2018.
EPA and the PRP finalized an AOC for geophysical investigation, drainage study, and site security measures in October 2019.
EPA accepted the Geotechnical Investigation and Drainage Study Data Summary Report in February 2022.
As noted above, EPA and the PRP finished negotiations and signed an AOC for the implementation of the NTCRA to demolish and remove the mill complex in July 2022. 
The PRP is currently developing plans for the implementation of a PDI (the PDI Report is anticipated in early 2025). The results of the PDI will be evaluated and ultimately support the design of the demolition and removal activities under the oversight of EPA and MEDEP. Top of Page