BOFORS NOBEL, INC.MUSKEGON, MI 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 85-acre Bofors-Nobel site is located in Egelston Township, Michigan. The site includes a former chemical production facility (Lomac, Inc.) and 10 abandoned sludge lagoons. Starting around 1960, the facility made alcohol-based detergents, saccharin, pesticides, herbicides and dye intermediates. The unlined lagoons received wastewater and sludge wastes until about 1976. Waste disposal operations contaminated lagoon sludges, soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. Part of the site’s long-term remedy is in place. Investigation of the site’s 39-acre former production area is ongoing.
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions, in a legal agreement known as a consent decree. The long-term remedy Cleanup of the site has included: 
installing extraction wells to capture and contain contaminated groundwater
installing a soil cover over contaminated soil and sludge
planting native vegetative species to stabilize soil and to aid with contaminant uptake
building and maintaining a treatment wetland and groundwater treatment plant
installing an underground barrier wall 
EPA staff continue to monitor site groundwater for the continued presence of contaminants of concern, including ammonia, 3,3-dichlorobenzidine (DCB), aniline, benzidine, chlorobenzene, as well as to ensure that the extraction wells prevent the discharge of contaminated water into Black Creek. As a result, a long-term protective measure for this site includes restricting future site access, zoning, as well as land and groundwater use, using a legal mechanism termed Institutional Controls, or ICs (see “Activity and Use Limitations” below). Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is in the Operations & Maintenance phase of the Superfund process. EPA completed the sixth five-year review of the site in 2023. The Superfund law requires regular checkups of sites that have been cleaned up – with waste managed on-site – to make sure the cleanup continues to protect people and the environment. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. This five-year review found that the remedy is currently protective of human health and the environment in the short-term, since no one is drinking contaminated groundwater and the remedy mitigates direct exposure to contaminants. However, EPA cannot make a long-term protectiveness determination at this time. To guarantee that the remedy is functioning as intended, the potentially responsible party must: 
Investigate the presence of contaminants of concern at levels that exceed state limits at the groundwater/surface water interface monitoring wells.
Conduct ecological risk assessments to determine if exposure to site contaminants is posing a risk to wildlife and plants in the treatment wetland and Black Creek.
Finalize a Performance Standards Verification Plan.
Develop a sampling plan for PFAS compounds and determine where they are present at the site. 
The five-year review determines that these activities will take two years to complete, at which time the protectiveness of the remedy can be re-evaluated. 
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Pursuant to CERCLA § 122, EPA issued Special Notice Letters to identified PRPs in July 1993, providing an opportunity for their participation in the construction of EPAs OU 1 selected remedy.  Top of Page