CLARE WATER SUPPLYCLARE, MI
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Clare Water Supply site covers most of downtown Clare, Michigan and includes the city's Municipal Wellfield.  Two of the four municipal wells are contaminated continually with low levels of chlorinated hydrocarbons such as trichloroethene and intermittently by hydrocarbons such as benzene. The aquifer serving the municipal wells became contaminated by multiple sources that came from a nearby industrial park. The facilities in this area released contaminants from leaking underground storage tanks, above ground waste piles, sludge lagoons that spilled over to surface water that recharged the wellfield during heavy rains, and from vapor degreasers that leaked through floor drains inside of one of the facilities.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA signed a Record of Decision in 1996, which outlines the agency’s approach to clean up the site. The site’s long-term remedy includes soil vapor extraction, groundwater extraction and treatment, and institutional controls to limit access and use at the site. As additional “hotspots” were identified, the remedy has been enhanced to address additional contamination. Additionally, contaminated municipal wells have been replaced. Prior to selection of the remedy, two air stripping towers were installed at the site to protect the city's water supply. The air strippers have maintained a safe water supply since early 1991 and continue to treat the water supply prior to distribution.
What Is the Current Site Status?
To ensure continued protectiveness, EPA has put in place ongoing pumping and treatment of the public water supply aquifer, groundwater monitoring, and implementation of institutional controls and an Institutional Controls Plan. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment. The most recent review concluded that EPA’s response actions at the site continue to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term.
Fifth Five Year Review Report (Signed) - Clare Water Supply - 2021 (pdf)(152pp, 17.82MB, About PDF) 
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Groundwater and soil are contaminated with volatile organic compounds, including vinyl chloride, trichloroethone, dichlorethene, and dichloroethane and fuel related compounds such as benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, xylene and MTBE. 

Enforcement Information
Potentially Responsible Parties and EPA entered into legal agreements known as a Consent Decree in November 1998 and an Administrative Order by Consent in December 1998 to clean up the site.
