ORGANIC CHEMICALS, INC.GRANDVILLE, MI
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Organic Chemicals Inc. (OCI) site is located about one mile southeast of the Grand River in Grandville. It was previously used for petroleum refining from 1941 to 1945 and for transport and storage operations from 1945 to 1966. A succession of petroleum-related industries leased the land, prior to its purchase by Spartan Chemicals in 1968. Spartan Chemical Co. reclaimed solvents and conducted chemical manufacturing operations of its subsidiary, Organic Chemicals Co.  OCI operated on the site from 1968 to 1991, and, in 1979, became the owner by a deed conveyance from Spartan. Residential areas are about 200 feet southeast and 1,700 feet to the southwest of the site. All water is supplied by the city of Grandville although some residents use well water for lawn sprinkling. Between 1968 and 1980, company records indicate that OCI discharged its process waste and cooling water, which included hazardous wastes, into the on-site seepage lagoon. In 1980, the company installed a wastewater pre-treatment facility with discharge to the city's sanitary sewer system.  The soil cleanup was completed in 2003 by excavating about 2,500 cubic yards of the contaminated soil and disposed of off-site. Contaminated water and sludge was removed from concrete tanks in 2006, and the tanks have been closed. In 2010, EPA approved an enhanced bioremediation pilot study which injected a soy-based liquid underground to help naturally occurring bacteria break down any remaining groundwater contamination. Groundwater is sampled annually to make sure contamination is not traveling off-site. A new owner developed the site as a truck parking center under Superfund’s reuse program.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions.EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Continued protectiveness of the remedy requires compliance with effective institutional controls and continued monitoring and assessment of groundwater.

What Is the Current Site Status?
October 2024 EPA completed a review of the site's cleanup (pdf) (10 MB, About PDF). This type of review is required at least every five years where the cleanup is complete but hazardous waste remains managed on-site. These reviews are done to ensure that the cleanup continues to protect people and the environment. The review included:
An evaluation of background information
Cleanup requirements
Effectiveness of the cleanup and any anticipated future actions
Maintenance and monitoring efforts
An analysis of ways for EPA to operate more efficiently
The review found the cleanup continues to protect people and the environment. Groundwater should be sampled to determine if the Contaminants of Emerging Concern 1,4-dioxane and Per- and Polyfluoroakyl Substances are absent from the Site. Although contamination in groundwater is declining, the cleanup will continue until goals are achieved. The next scheduled review will be in 2029.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The primary contaminants at the site are associated with the past operation of the seepage pit by OCI, chemical spills at the site, and past oil-related activities. These areas are the former seepage lagoon, the former lacquer thinner spill site, and petroleum sludge lagoons. Prior to cleanup, the total organic compounds in soil exceeded 2,747,000, 85,600, and 149,000 parts per billion (ppb), respectively, at these areas. These contaminants included elevated levels of chlorinated solvents and benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene (BETX) compounds. Lower concentrations of other volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and semi-VOCs were also detected. Polychlorinated biphenyls in the surface soil samples were found predominantly within the site. Concentrations in this area ranged from 43 to 74,000 ppb. Groundwater contamination also included BETX compounds with concentrations as high as 54,000 ppb. 
