Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Ten-Mile Drain (site map) (PDF) (1﻿ pp, 571K, About PDF) in St. Clair Shores, Michigan, includes an underground storm sewer utility heavily contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). A historical PCB release is believed to have migrated from a commercial parking lot onto adjacent properties and into and through the Ten Mile Drain storm sewer system (TMD system). The TMD system is approximately 15 feet below ground and discharges into two residential canals – the Lange and Revere Street canals – connected to Lake St. Clair. The canals provide recreational boating access to Lake St. Clair for approximately 125 homes and are also used for swimming and fishing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Background The Ten-Mile Drain (site map) (PDF) (1﻿ pp, 571K) in St. Clair Shores, Michigan, includes an underground storm sewer utility heavily contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls. A historical PCB release is believed to have migrated from a commercial parking lot onto adjacent properties and into and through the Ten Mile Drain storm sewer system (TMD system). The TMD system is approximately 15 feet below ground and discharges into two residential canals – the Lange and Revere Street canals – connected to Lake St. Clair. The canals provide recreational boating access to Lake St. Clair for approximately 125 homes and are also used for swimming and fishing. 
The site is being addressed through federal and state actions. Several site cleanup milestones have already been achieved.The site is being addressed through federal and state actions. Several site cleanup milestones have already been achieved. Several removal actions, interim remedial actions and associated investigations have taken place since PCBs were first discovered at the site in 2001. Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy (EGLE), Macomb County Public Works Office (MCPWO), City of St. Clair Shores, Macomb County Health Department, and EPA’s removal response staff have done extensive cleanup, responded to residents’ concerns, and conducted investigations at the site. EPA completed its second five-year review of the Ten-Mile Drain Superfund site in March 2022. The review concluded that two interim cleanup plans, one in September 2011 and one in May 2014, selected by EPA continue to protect human health and the environment. The third five-year review process will start in March of 2026 with the final report due by March 2027. Second Five-Year Review Report (2022) (PDF) (59 pp, 9.04MB K) Near-Surface PCB-Contaminated Soil Cleanup  In 2018 EPA selected a remedy to address the PCB contamination in the soil at residential and commercial areas known as Investigation Areas 1 and 2 of the site announced in the 2018 Record of Decision (PDF) (90pp, 2.15MB). The selected cleanup plan includes: 
Excavating near-surface soil with PCB concentrations exceeding selected cleanup levels, followed by off-site disposal of PCB-contaminated soil at an appropriate landfill./p> 
Cleanup eligibility at a property is based on the PCB level found in soil. 
Residential properties with more than 1 part per million (ppm) of PCBs in soil.
Commercial properties with more than 10 ppm of PCBs in soil.
Right-of-way/Utility Corridor properties with more than 21 ppm of PCBs in soil. 
In 2019 EPA conducted the remedial design sampling for residential soil cleanup at the site, the phase of the Superfund process when the technical specifications for cleanup remedies and technologies are designed. Since then, EPA has completed remedial design sampling at 248 properties in the two residential areas of the Ten-Mile Drain Superfund site. The two areas are Investigation Area 1 (around Lakeland and Bon Brae Streets and Harper Avenue) and Investigation Area 2 (centered on the Lange and Revere Street canals) as shown on the site map (PDF) (1pp, 1.66MB). EPA completed a basis of design document in 2020, which contains design drawings for each cleanup-eligible property, including information such as PCB concentrations in the soil and required depth of excavation. In 2021, the site received funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which invested $3.5 billion in environmental remediation at Superfund sites on the National Priorities List.  EPA began cleanup in September 2023 and completed the cleanup of 55 residential properties and one commercial property in November 2024. Ten-Mile Drain Storm Sewer System’s Ongoing Source Control Activities As specified in EPA's 2011 Interim Record of Decision (PDF) (52 pp, 5.56 MB) there are 17 weirs installed inside the Ten Mile Drain storm sewer system near the Bon Brae Street and Harper Avenue to slow or stop the movement of PCB contamination to the Lange and Revere street Canals. EPA contractors conduct bi-monthly weir maintenance activities which include collecting sediment and oil samples inside the drain; periodic removal and proper disposal of PCB saturated snares and PCB-contaminated sediment and placement of clean absorbent snares to soak up PCB oil. For more information on site remedial and removal actions and community involvement activities from 2001 to 2019, see the site’s history timeline (PDF) (30 pp, 4.01MB). EPA is addressing the remaining  portion of the TMD storm sewer system (including backfill materials) with PCB contamination with a Record of Decision, issued in January 2024. Please see below under “What Is the Current Site Status?” for more information about this Record of Decision. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Near Surface Soil in Investigation Areas 1 and 2
In November 2024, EPA completed the cleanup of soil contaminated with PCBs at a total of 56 properties (55 residential properties and 1 commercial property). As a follow-up to the cleanup, each property owner will receive a remedial action completion letter, which will include a summary of the work completed on their property and a notification that EPA has determined that no further action or restoration is required on their property. Ten-Mile Drain Storm Sewer System Ten-Mile Drain Storm Sewer System EPA issued a Record of Decision for the Ten-Mile Drain storm sewer system in January 2024. This Record of Decision addresses the remaining portion of the storm sewer system impacted by PCBs. The goal of the selected cleanup plan is to eliminate the risk posed by PCB contamination to utility workers, as well as to prevent ongoing release of PCBs through the rest of the storm sewer system. The system empties into two canals—Lange and Revere Street canals—connected to Lake St. Clair. The cleanup plan includes excavation and removal of six manhole vaults, and removal of a segment of the TMD concrete pipe (approximately 2,110 linear feet) along with the PCB-impacted stone bedding and backfill materials. Read the full Record of Decision (PDF) (132 pp, 6.9MB) Lange and Revere Canal Sediments EPA will need to monitor the effectiveness of the selected remedy for the Ten-Mile Drain storm sewer drain system for a sufficient length of time to ensure that PCB concentrations are decreasing before implementing a cleanup for the Lange and Revere Canal sediments. This is important to confirm that sources from the Ten-Mile Drain system will no longer continue to release PCB contamination to the canals. Once monitoring data results are in, EPA will then propose and select a cleanup plan to manage sediments contaminated with  PCBs  in the Lange and Street canals.
Sampling and MonitoringEGLE conducted a site investigation in July 2008 to document and obtain sufficient data to support listing the TMD site on the National Priorities List (NPL). EPA proposed the site for the NPL in March 2010 and finalized the site on the NPL in September 2010. In April 2011, EPA began its source area investigation fieldwork to find the source of the high PCB concentrations that were continuing to infiltrate the TMD System. The investigation focused on the sanitary sewer, gas, and water main utility corridors that crossed the TMD system utility corridor, which potentially could provide preferential pathways for PCB contamination to migrate into the TMD pipe. It also included additional sampling within the TMD system utility corridor. In August 2011, EPA designed and conducted a sediment sampling project in the Lange and Revere Street canals. Based on the findings of this sampling, the highest PCB concentrations were found near the TMD system outfall and ranged from 100 ppm to 570 ppm. The PCB concentrations decreased with depth and distance from the outfall. In September 2011, EPA issued the first Interim Record of Decision (PDF) (52 pp, 5.56 MB) for the TMD site to address the high concentrations of PCB-contaminated oil and sediments that continued to accumulate behind the weirs inside the TMD system. EPA finalized its Source Area Investigation Report (PDF) (389 pp, 9.03 MB) in January 2012. The results of the extensive investigation found significant concentrations of PCB-contaminated oil within the TMD system utility corridor backfill materials adjacent to four vaulted manhole locations: J01, M7179, M4335, and M7183. Importantly, only exceptionally low PCB concentrations were found in the backfill materials of the other utility corridors, ruling out the sanitary sewer, gas, and water main utility corridors as a source or conduit for the high PCB concentrations found at the TMD site. Additionally, PCBs were found in all depth intervals of the backfill materials near the intersection of Bon Brae Street and Harper Avenue, between Bon Brae and Lakeland Streets. In August 2015, additional remedial investigation (RI) sampling was conducted focusing on the former Martin Drain (also known as the Old Martin Drain). The objective of the sampling was to determine if the former Martin Drain was previously a migration pathway for PCB contamination. Based on the overall sample results, EPA determined that the former Martin Drain was a limited historical pathway for PCB migration. The sampling is documented in the 2016 Remedial Investigation Report (PDF) (1562 pp, 84.33 MB) for the site.
Emergency Response and RemovalCleanup included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment under EPA’s Emergency Response and Removal Program. EPA dredged the canals in 2003-2004 and cleaned out the underground storm sewer drain system. However, the contamination returned. As a result, in September 2010, EPA added the site to the National Priorities List for cleanup under the Superfund Program, which focuses on long-term cleanup projects. EPA conducted another removal action in 2006. Most activities focused on seawall repairs, installing a cured-in-place pipe liner inside a portion of the drain, and adding monitoring wells. In addition, EPA removed contaminated soil from nine residential yards and public easements. Read more on EPA’s Response portal for St Clair Shores Drain, 2006-2007. In 2010 EPA initiated another time-critical removal action, which included the following activities: high-pressure jet-vacuuming of the storm sewer system to remove PCB oil and sediment; off-site disposal of the PCB-contaminated materials; and installation of temporary weir structures in 15 manhole locations to allow sediment collection points. In addition, a total of 43 soil borings were installed at eleven properties – seven residential and four commercial. Read more on EPA’s Response portal for St Clair Shores PCB Drain #2, 2010. In 2011, EPA conducted a removal action to remove PCB oil inside the drain. Absorbent snares were used to swipe and soak up the oil that had collected behind the weirs. A total of 6 of the 17 weirs required cleanout and one 55-gallon drum of soiled absorbent snares was collected for disposal. In 2014, EPA completed a time-critical removal of PCB-contaminated soil from nine residential properties and one commercial property. PCBs were found in the soil at or near the ground surface at these locations that were above EPA’s removal action criteria. About 1,500 tons of soil were removed and disposed at an offsite facility located in Wayne, Michigan.
More Information
EPA Conducting Cleanup of PCBs Near Harper and Lakeland (PDF) ( 788.53 KB)
EPA Response portal for St. Clair Shores PCB Drain #2, 2014. 
In 2020, EPA completed a time-critical cleanup to remove PCB-contaminated soil at or near the surface of eight properties. Of the properties, six were public rights-of-way and two were residential yards.. After excavation of the contaminated soil, backfill, and final grading at each property, sod was applied to the ground surface to restore the vegetated areas to their original conditions. EPA provided watering for sod and trees for 30 days after planting to ensure proper restoration. 
Fact Sheet - EPA Conducting Cleanup at Residential Properties (PDF) (403.66 K). 
Time-critical cleanups are done when there is a risk of a pollutant or contaminant presenting an imminent and substantial danger to humans or the environment based on consultations with health agencies. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
MDEQ conducted a site investigation in July 2008 to document and obtain sufficient data to support listing the TMD site on the National Priorities List (NPL). EPA proposed the site for the NPL in March 2010 and finalized the site on the NPL in September 2010. In April 2011, EPA began its source area investigation fieldwork in an attempt to find the source of the high PCB concentrations that were continuing to infiltrate the TMD system. The investigation focused on the sanitary sewer, gas, and water main utility corridors that crossed the TMD system utility corridor, which potentially could provide preferential pathways for PCB contamination to migrate into the TMD pipe. It also included additional sampling within the TMD system utility corridor. In August 2011, EPA designed and conducted a sediment sampling project in the Lange and Revere Street canals. Based on the findings of this sampling, the highest PCB concentrations were found near the TMD system outfall and ranged from 100 ppm to 570 ppm. The PCB concentrations decreased with depth and distance from the outfall.  In September 2011, EPA issued the first Interim Record of Decision (52 pp, 5.56 MB) for the TMD site to address the high concentrations of PCB-contaminated oil and sediments that continued to accumulate behind the weirs inside the TMD system. EPA finalized its Source Area Investigation Report (389 pp, 9.03 MB) in January 2012. The results of the extensive investigation found significant concentrations of PCB-contaminated oil within the TMD system utility corridor backfill materials adjacent to four vaulted manhole locations: J01, M7179, M4335, and M7183. Importantly, only very low PCB concentrations were found in the backfill materials of the other utility corridors, ruling out the sanitary sewer, gas, and water main utility corridors as a source or conduit for the high PCB concentrations found at the TMD site. Additionally, PCBs were found in all depth intervals of the backfill materials near the intersection of Bon Brae Street and Harper Avenue, between Bon Brae and Lakeland Streets. In August 2015, additional remedial investigation (RI) sampling was conducted focusing on the former Martin Drain (also known as the Old Martin Drain). The objective of the sampling was to determine if the former Martin Drain was previously a migration pathway for PCB contamination. Based on the overall sample results, EPA determined that the former Martin Drain was likely a limited historical pathway for PCB migration. The sampling is documented in the 2016 Remedial Investigation Report (1562 pp, 84.33 MB, About PDF) for the site. 
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Cleanup included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment under EPA’s Emergency Response and Removal Program. EPA dredged the canals in 2003-4 and cleaned out the underground storm sewer drain system. However, the contamination returned. As a result, in September 2010, EPA added the site to the National Priorities List for cleanup under the Superfund Program, which focuses on long-term cleanup projects. EPA conducted another removal action in 2006. Most activities focused on seawall repairs, installing a cured-in-place pipe liner inside a portion of the drain, and adding monitoring wells. In addition, EPA removed contaminated soil from nine residential yards and public easements. Read more on EPA’s Response portal for St Clair Shores Drain, 2006-2007. In 2010 EPA initiated another time-critical removal action, which included the following activities: high-pressure jet-vacuuming of the storm sewer system to remove PCB oil and sediment; off-site disposal of the PCB-contaminated materials; and installation of temporary weir structures in 15 manhole locations to allow sediment collection points. In addition, a total of 43 soil borings were installed at eleven properties – seven residential and four commercial. Read more on EPA’s Response portal for St Clair Shores PCB Drain #2, 2010. In 2011 EPA conducted a removal action to remove PBC oil inside the drain. Absorbent snares were used to swipe and soak up the oil that had collected behind the weirs. A total of 6 of the 17 weirs required cleanout and one 55-gallon drum of soiled absorbent snares was collected for disposal. In 2014 EPA completed a time-critical removal of PCB-contaminated soil from nine residential properties and one commercial property. PCBs were found in the soil at or near the ground surface at these locations that were above EPA’s removal action criteria. About 1,500 tons of soil were removed and disposed at an offsite facility located in Wayne, Michigan. More information: EPA Conducting Cleanup of PCBs Near Harper and Lakeland (PDF) (2 pp, 788.53KB, About PDF) EPA Response portal for St. Clair Shores PCB Drain #2, 2014 
EPA completed a time-critical cleanup in 2020 to remove PCB-contaminated soil at or near the surface of eight properties located within the Superfund site. Of the properties, six were public rights-of-way and two were residential yards. The locations were on Bon Brae Street, except for one area on Lange Street. After excavation of the contaminated soil, backfill, and final grading at each property, sod was applied to the ground surface to restore the vegetated areas to their original appearance. New trees were planted on the properties where homeowners requested replacements for trees removed during excavation, and mulch was added around their base. EPA provided watering for sod and trees for 30 days after planting to ensure proper restoration. Fact Sheet - EPA Conducting Cleanup at Residential Properties (PDF) (2﻿ pp, 403.66 K, About PDF) Time-critical cleanups are done when there is a risk of a pollutant or contaminant presenting an imminent and substantial danger to humans or the environment based on consultations with health agencies. 
Top of Page