TWIN CITIES AIR FORCE RESERVE BASE (SMALL ARMS RANGE LANDFILL)MINNEAPOLIS, MN
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Twin Cities Air Force Reserve Base (Small Arms Range Landfill) site is a 2-acre landfill between the Minnesota River and the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport, in an area where about 64,700 people depend on public and private wells for drinking water. The site was a landfill from 1963 until 1972 for the disposal of general base refuse and industrial waste, including 100 gallons of painting waste sludge, 800 pounds of paint filters and 100 to 200 gallons of sludge from leaded aviation gasoline. Following cleanup, EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1996.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The U.S. Air Force is the party responsible for the site’s cleanup. The site is being addressed through federal actions in accordance with the site’s federal facility agreement. Per the agreement, EPA has exercised approval authority over the Air Force’s work at the site. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. The most recent review in 2023 concluded:
Response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term, with ongoing compliance with effective institutional controls required for long-term protectiveness.
The review recommended sampling for per- and poly-fluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS), given PFAS has been found at the nearby Air Force Reserve base. The Air Force is currently planning for work to sample for PFAS, expected to begin in 2025.

What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy includes monitored natural attenuation, site maintenance, access restrictions, and groundwater and surface water monitoring. Natural attenuation describes a variety of in-place processes that, under favorable conditions, act without human intervention to reduce the mass, toxicity, mobility, volume or concentration of contaminants in groundwater.Remedy construction finished in 1992. After follow-up investigations, EPA determined that the cleanup had eliminated the health threats posed by the site and that no further cleanup actions were necessary. EPA took the site off the NPL in 1996. EPA placed the site on the NPL in 1987.

Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, lead, nickel, selenium and vanadium, which exceeded the Safe Drinking Water Acts  maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) and Minnesota ground water standards.

Enforcement Information
The U.S. Air Force is responsible for the site. A federal facility agreement between the Air Force and EPA gives EPA approval authority over work the Air Force has done.
