Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 163-acre St. Regis Paper Company site is located within the external boundaries of the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe Exit Indian Reservation in Cass Lake, Minnesota. The wood-treatment facility operated from the 1950s to the 1980s using creosote and pentachlorophenol. The facility’s operations contaminated soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. The contaminants of concern include pentachlorophenol, dioxin and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, or PAHs. EPA continues to work with the community and various stakeholders to implement the remaining final cleanup actions for surface soil and a groundwater plume not initially identified. However, data indicate that the site is protective of human health and the environment for all current exposure routes. EPA expects that its final cleanup actions will be protective of all current and future exposure routes. Operable Units During cleanup, a site can be divided into a number of distinct areas depending on its complexity. These areas, called operable units (OUs), may address geographic areas, specific problems, or areas where a specific action is required. The St. Regis site has five geographic OUs: 
OU1 is where the wood treatment and storage facility were located.
OU2 is where sludge was dumped and where the containment vault is located.
OU3 is within the City Dump where sludge was deposited and burned.
OU7 is those residential properties adjacent to the former operations area.
OU9 is a groundwater plume in the Fox Creek Valley. 
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
This site is being addressed through federal, state, and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. Several site cleanup milestones have already been achieved. In 1986, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) signed two Minnesota Enforcement Decision documents which outlined the response actions for contaminated soil, sludge and groundwater at the site. Beginning in 1987, then-owner Champion International Corporation (Champion) extended the Cass Lake municipal water system to nearby residences, excavated 37,500 cubic yards of contaminated soil and sludge from the wastewater lagoons and 4,500 cubic yards of contaminated soil and sludge from the city dump pit, and constructed groundwater extraction wells at both the treatment facility area and the city dump area. The contaminated groundwater is extracted, treated onsite to remove contaminants, and then discharged into a channel between Pike Bay and Cass Lake. Champion constructed an onsite containment vault to hold the excavated soil and sludge. Champion and subsequent owner International Paper (IP) has monitored and maintained the treatment system and soil containment unit since the late 1980s. In 1995, EPA became the lead agency for the site. In 2001 EPA collected data from the site to evaluate whether the response actions remained protective of human health and the environment. Dioxin was encountered in shallow soils on the site property at levels above the Superfund Removal Action Level of 1 parts per billion toxic equivalency (ppb TEQ). In 2003 EPA issued an administrative order (pdf) (106 pp, About pdf) that directed the potentially responsible party (PRP) to conduct a Removal Site Evaluation and Supplemental Assessment to delineate the extent of soil contamination. Based on additional confirmatory and delineation sampling performed by IP in 2003, IP and BNSF Railway Co. removed nearly 4,000 tons of contaminated soil in shallow soil between 2003 and 2005 under EPA oversight. In 2004 EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order (pdf) (20 pp, About pdf) to IP to conduct a Human Health and Ecological Risk Assessment. EPA oversaw the analysis of thousands of samples of soil, sediment, groundwater, surface water, indoor dust, fish, and other plants and animals for the assessment. The report (pdf) (687 pp, About pdf) was finalized in 2011 and concluded that contaminated surface soil on one residential property could pose unacceptable noncancer risks to a potential future child resident, that the contaminated groundwater plumes could pose unacceptable noncancer risks to future utility workers, and that contaminated soil in the southwestern corner of the containment unit area is acutely toxic to invertebrates. Since 2005 IP has performed several investigations and activities to determine whether the groundwater remedial actions are effectively capturing and removing contaminated groundwater. IP drilled several new soil borings and monitoring wells between 2006 and 2017 east of the former treatment area and the city dump area. The groundwater samples from these borings showed that a tarry liquid was present in the city dump area plume and that the plumes in the operational area and the city dump area are not fully captured by the groundwater extraction system. IP performed additional groundwater studies to better understand the hydrogeology of the site and developed a new ground water model to evaluate the overall effectiveness of the groundwater extraction system. As a result, starting in 2019, IP began to modify the extraction system to improve capture of the contaminated groundwater, a process that is ongoing. Soil remedy EPA issued an Interim Record of Decision (pdf) (97 pp, About pdf) in 2005 based on samples of dioxin-contaminated indoor dust in nearby homes that showed unacceptable risks to residents. Necessary interim cleanup actions included an initial comprehensive cleaning of all area residences with carpet replacement, HEPA vacuum cleaning, wet wiping, steam cleaning soft furniture, and cleaning of draperies and rugs. In addition, supplemental periodic cleaning of homes, clean soil yard cover, and dust suppression to the unpaved roads was required. In 2006, under EPA oversight, International Paper conducted all initial cleanings, the yard work, and dust suppression. The house cleanings and dust suppression will continue until a final remedy for surface soil is completed. In September 2008, based on unacceptable potential risks from surface soil and groundwater identified in the risk assessment, IP and BNSF signed an Administrative Order on Consent (pdf) (58 pp, About pdf) with EPA to conduct a feasibility study  to evaluate final remedial alternatives. EPA issued a Proposed Plan (pdf) (19 pp, About pdf) outlining EPA’s preferred remedial alternative in 2011, but at the request of LLBO and MPCA, EPA agreed to defer issuing a Record of Decision until additional soil sampling was conducted. Additional soil samples collected in 2013 and 2014 largely confirmed the distribution of soil contamination. EPA proposed a revised cleanup plan to address soil contamination in the residential areas in 2019.  EPA held a 60-day public comment period before issuing its 2020 Record of Decision on the selected cleanup plan. More information EPA Selects Final Cleanup Plan for Contaminated Soil (pdf) (2 pp, About pdf) EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The Sixth Five-Year Review Report (2020) (pdf) (139 pp, About pdf) is the most recent. The review report concluded that response actions at the site protect human health in the short term. EPA expects the cleanup to be protective of human health and the environment in the long term after design and implementation of the residential area soil cleanup, selection and implementation of cleanups for the industrial/commercial areas, attainment of groundwater capture, and implementation of enforceable land use controls. In the interim, there are no apparent complete human exposure pathways; therefore, there are no unacceptable current human risks. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA Newsletters EPA issues biannual newsletters that provide site status updates and other information for the community. 
St. Regis Superfund Site Newsletter - July 2024 (pdf) (4 pp)
St. Regis Superfund Site Newsletter - December 2023 (pdf) (4 pp) Site Status The U.S. EPA issued a Record of Decision (pdf) (128 pp, About pdf) in April 2020 which documents the Agency’s selected plan to clean up soil contamination in the residential areas (referred to as operable unit 7, or OU7) at the site. The following steps were proposed as part of the cleanup plan: 
Removing contaminated soil from impacted residential areas and replacing it with clean soil and vegetation.
Burying most of the removed soil onsite.
Covering the buried contaminated soil with a liner and clean soil.
Monitoring the buried contaminated soil.
Removing heavily contaminated soil and disposing it at an off-site facility. 
Fact Sheet: EPA Selects Final Cleanup Plan for Contaminated Soil (pdf) (2﻿ pp, About pdf) Under the authority of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA, commonly known as Superfund), the EPA gets sites cleaned up by negotiating with the companies or people responsible for contamination at a site or ordering them to do the cleanup themselves, or to pay for the cleanup done by another party (i.e., EPA, state, or other responsible parties). In May 2021, EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order to IP and BNSF for cleanup of residential properties. Multiple stakeholders are working to finalize plans for a pre-design investigation and development of the remedial design. In 2024, EPA requested an investigation of the north area groundwater plume to ensure the long-term effectiveness of the treatment system, which currently treats 7,300 gallons of groundwater per hour. The goal of the investigation is to improve the time of groundwater cleanup. This groundwater is not an active drinking water source. The City of Cass Lake has two municipal wells outside of the area of contamination that draw water from aquifers ranging from 111 to 170 feet below the surface. EPA is continuing to coordinate with the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) and the LLBO DRM on the Fox Creek groundwater investigation. It’s expected that more monitoring wells will be installed winter of 2025 to track, measure, and determine the source of the groundwater contamination. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The city of Cass Lake Resolution 14-2006 prohibits the construction and use of private water wells and requires the permanent sealing of a private water well. The city of Cass Lake Zoning Ordinance No. 12282005 limits the use (e.g. small scale industrial, low density residential) of properties in Cass Lake. A Quit Claim Deed on some properties owned by the city of Cass Lake prevents installation of groundwater wells or any use which would disturb the properties. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Many investigations as well as routine monitoring have been performed at the site since the early 1980s. Samples of soil, groundwater, surface water, sediment, indoor dust, fish tissue, and plant tissues have been collected and analyzed. Groundwater samples continue to be analyzed on a quarterly basis and treatment plant effluent is analyzed on a monthly basis. Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Cleanup has included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In 2003, EPA issued an Administrative Order on Consent (pdf) (54pp, About pdf) that directed IP to excavate surface soil on portions on commercial property owned by the City of Cass Lake with dioxin concentrations exceeding 1 part per billion (ppb). The removal action was completed in 2005 and removed a total of 3,321 tons of contaminated soil. In 2005, EPA and BNSF signed an Administrative Order on Consent (pdf) (33 pp, About pdf) for a removal action to include excavation of shallow soil containing dioxin levels at or above 5 ppb on BNSF property. The excavation was completed in 2005 and involved the removal of 674 tons of contaminated soil and subsequent revegetation and fencing of all areas above 1 ppb. In 2006, to address the property owned by Cass Forest Products, IP took a voluntary response action to apply geotextile fabric and 4 inches of clean gravel to work areas and fence another area above a surface soil dioxin concentration of 1 ppb. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
The site is being addressed through potentially responsible party (PRP) actions under federal oversight, in consultation with EPA’s two support agency partners, the LLBO and the MPCA. During the past 20 years, the level of effort on this site has been high from EPA, State and Tribal regulators, and the potentially responsible parties. Removal actions and interim remedial actions have been taken to reduce health risks to the local residents while work continues on selecting and implementing final cleanup remedies. In May 2021 EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order (UAO) for Remedial Design and Remedial Action (pdf) (186 pp, About pdf) to potentially responsible parties (PRPs) of the St. Regis Paper Co. Superfund site, International Paper and Burlington Northern Santa Fe, to conduct the remedial design and remedial action to address residential soil. Top of Page