ARROWHEAD REFINERY CO.HERMANTOWN, MN 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Arrowhead Refinery Superfund site is located in Hermantown, Minnesota. The site is a 10-acre former waste oil recycling 
facility within a white cedar wetland. The 
refining process generated a waste stream of highly acidic, metal-laden sludge 
which was disposed of in an unlined two-acre lagoon on the site. The waste 
process water was also discharged into a wastewater ditch in a wetland area. 
Arrowhead Refining Company incorporated in 1961 and continued the re-refining 
activities until 1977. A public health risk assessment stated that if no action 
was taken to remedy the site, use or development of the site would result in 
unacceptable health effects on user populations. It was also determined that 
there was a future potential exposure risk for offsite drinking water wells 
across the road from the site and in the pathway of the contaminated groundwater 
plume. The record of decision (ROD) was issued in September 1986.  
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Site investigations that began in May 1984 found volatile organic compounds (VOCs), polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PNAs), carcinogenic PNAs, petroleum hydrocarbons, and metals in the source material, soils, and sediments. The record of decision (ROD) was issued in September 1986. The site’s final remedy included excavation, treatment and off-site disposal of sludge and filter cake, excavation and off-site disposal of soils and sediments, and groundwater extraction and treatment. Construction of the final remedy took place between 1991 and 1996. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
In September 2021, the Arrowhead Refinery site was deleted from the National Priorities List. The NPL tracks the nation’s most contaminated sites that threaten human health or the environment. EPA determined that cleanup at the site is now complete, and no further action is necessary other than continued site inspections, land and groundwater use restrictions and five-year reviews. A proposed or final deletion does not prevent future actions under the Superfund law. EPA is currently conducting the fifth five-year review of the site. The Superfund law requires regular checkups of sites that have been cleaned up – with waste managed on-site – to make sure the cleanup continues to protect people and the environment.
EPA is proposing to delete the Arrowhead Refinery Superfund site from the National Priorities List, the list of the nation’s most hazardous waste sites eligible for cleanup under the Superfund program. EPA removes sites or parts of sites from the list once all the remedies are successfully implemented. The Agency has determined that the required cleanup for this site is complete and no further action, other than site inspections, continued land and groundwater use restrictions, and five-year reviews is necessary. The deletion will be effective in September 2021 unless EPA receives comments against the deletion. In consideration of those public comments, EPA will reassess its proposal to remove the site from the NPL. Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Site cleanup also included short-term actions to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In 1990, 13 residences were connected to the public water supply.
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
No current enforcment activities. Top of Page