Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Riverfront Site is contaminated with industrial chemicals, primarily chlorinated volatile organics. In 1986, the Missouri Department of Natural Resources (MoDNR) began testing public supply wells in the state for volatile organic compounds and detected the chlorinated solvent Perchloroethene (PCE) in New Haven city wells Wl and W2. These wells were more than 800 feet deep. Concentrations of PCE in water samples from city well W2 increased steadily over time, from the initial detection of 28 micrograms per liter (ug/L) to a maximum of 140 ug/L before the well was removed from service in 1993. The concentrations of PCE in water samples from city well Wl generally were less than the federal allowable Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) of 5 ug/L. However, well Wl was in the Missouri River floodplain and had a prior history of bacterial contamination attributed to a poor surface casing seal that resulted in its removal from service in 1989. During 1988 and early 1994, two additional city wells (W3 and W4) were installed in the southern part of the city to compensate for the loss of city wells Wl and W2. Wells W3 and W4, while completed within the same aquifer, are cased several hundred feet deeper than wells Wl and W2. Various agencies have sampled city wells W3 and W4; no PCE or other VOCs have been detected in those samples. Results from several previous investigations resulted in an overall remedial investigation of the Riverfront Site. During 1993-94, an expanded site investigation was conducted to collect sufficient data to score the site for possible placement on the National Priorities List. Because several unresolved questions remained after the completion of the ESI, the EPA conducted an Expanded Site Investigation/Remedial Investigation (ESI/Rl) in 2000 to collect information on groundwater flow and groundwater contamination in the vicinity of well W2. The Riverfront site was included on the NPL in December 2000. Based on results of numerous investigations, six operable units (OUs) were identified as sources of contamination at the Riverfront Site. The six OUs are:
OU1: Front Street
OU2: Industrial Drive
OU3: Old City Dump
OU4: Maiden Lane Area
OU5: Old Hat Factory
OU6: Wildcat Creek Estates

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Remedial actions have been completed at OU1, OU3 and OU5. The RODs for OUs 1 and 3 were signed on September 30, 2003. The Consent Decree for OU3 was signed by the city of New Haven and the EPA in May 2007. The Record of Decision for OU4 is dated December 7, 2006. OU1 (Front Street) The OU1 2003 ROD called for a combination of institutional controls to restrict exposure to the shallow aquifer and soil contamination, proprietary controls, an environmental covenant and easement, installation of an Advanced Remedial Technology well and associated equipment, and extension of the monitoring well network to monitor the plume. Institutional controls are in place. The OU1 remedy was declared to be operational and functional on November 2, 2005. All groundwater concentrations are below the Alternate Concentration Limits established from site monitoring results indicating that the system is meeting the performance goals. OU2 (Industrial Drive) and OU6 (Wildcat Creek Estates) OU2 (Industrial Drive) and OU6 (Wildcat Creek Estates) are located south of State Highway 100. OU2 is a contaminant source area located within the New Haven city limits and OU6 is the contaminant groundwater plume in the residential Wildcat Creek Estates area that emanates from OU2. In 2011, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency issued the final ROD for OU2 and OU6. The selected remedy includes dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) recovery, followed by in situ chemical oxidation, whole-house water treatment units, in situ groundwater treatment, ICs and groundwater monitoring. The Phase I Remedial Design and Remedial Action Work Plan for OU2/OU6 was completed in May 2013 and the remedy is being implememted. Current zoning that prevents residential use in the OU2 source area addresses the contaminated soil exposure pathway. The planned remediation of COCs in soils and groundwater at OU2 will address dermal, ingestion and inhalation exposures.  While the OU2 remedy is implemented, exposure pathways at the OU6 residential area that could result in unacceptable risk are being controlled. ICs restrict the installation of new wells. The four residences with private supply wells impacted by PCE contamination in excess of the maximum contaminant level continue to use whole-house filtration units. In the event that PCE is detected in other residential supply wells above the MCL, whole-house treatment systems will be installed in accordance with the Consent Order.  OU3 (Old City Dump) The 2003 ROD specified that if PCE concentrations in groundwater samples remained below the MCL of 5 µg /L after the conclusion of one year of quarterly sampling, sampling would be reduced to every five years. Based on the results from the 2003-2004 quarterly monitoring, sampling frequency decreased to once every five years. None of the May 2008 or September 2013 samples from monitoring wells, an onsite seep, or nearby domestic wells contained detectable quantities of PCE or other volatile contaminants of concern listed in the 2003 ROD.   Based on the 2008 and 2013 sampling, no substantial changes in water quality have been observed in monitoring wells, seep or domestic well samples. Concentrations of constituents were within historical ranges and groundwater quality near OU3 appears stable and relatively unchanged. Institutional Controls are in place and MoDNR regulations prohibit placement of new wells within 300 feet of the landfill.  Samples are collected from nearby monitoring wells and domestic wells every five years. The city of New Haven retains ownership of the dumpsite and the Environmental Covenant (2008) prohibits any use of the property that would be inconsistent with the environmental response in the ROD. No exceedances of any contaminants have occurred at OU3 for more than 15 years with no detections in more than 10 years. Based on these results, the EPA is proposed to delete OU3 from the NPL in April 2021. The institutional controls to restrict the installation of drinking water wells will still remain in place. The request for deletion was approved on 9/23/21.  OU4 (Maiden Lane Area) The contamination source at OU4 is likely the result of a private citizen disposing of significant amounts of PCE into his home’s grey water (sewer) line. The ROD for OU4 (Maiden Lane Area) was issued in 2009 and the remedy to address soil contamination through in situ chemical oxidation is being implemented. The selected remedy also includes a Technical Impracticability Waiver for groundwater in bedrock impacted from the OU4 soil source area. ICs are in place restricting well drilling and preventing unacceptable use of contaminated groundwater. Vapor intrusion sampling was conducted in 17 homes and a grade school in 2017 and 2018. All locations were below removal management levels for PCE and TCE indoor air except for the home located at 104 Maiden Lane. Additional indoor air sampling, along with soil sampling beneath and around the home have confirmed the presence of PCE and TCE above RMLs. Based on these conditions, the resident has been temporarily been relocated. A ROD to permanently relocate the resident was signed on 9/13/21. OU5 (Old Hat Factory) The OU5 2006 ROD documented that while the groundwater below OU5 was contaminated, the risk could be addressed with institutional controls and monitoring. The remedy was determined to be operational and functional in May 2009 and post-ROD groundwater monitoring is occurring. Institutional Controls are in place restricting well drilling and preventing unacceptable use of contaminated groundwater. The EPA and the state of Missouri continue to oversee and implement the actions required in the RODs. The remedial actions for OU2 and OU6 are being implemented. 
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is being addressed through federal and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. The long-term remedy included groundwater monitoring, installation of an advanced remedial technology well, environmental covenants and institutional controls to restrict human exposure to on-site contaminants, in-place chemical oxidation to treat contaminated soils, and dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) recovery and remediation. Cleanup, operation and maintenance activities and monitoring are ongoing. The EPA is working with the responsible parties to investigate the vapor intrusion pathway in buildings above the contaminated soils and groundwater plume.   In 2019, a Five-Year Review was conducted for the site. Remedies have been selected and implemented for OU1, OU3 and OU5. The recently selected remedial actions for OU2 and OU6 are in the early phase of implementation. The injection of a chemical oxidant to enhance chemical oxidation of the chemicals of concern at OU4 started in 2012 and is planned to be completed by 2022. This review covers the period from November 20, 2014 through November 20, 2019. OU1 – ICs remain in place and groundwater monitoring continues to occur. The remedy is functioning as intended by the ROD. OU2/OU6 – Whole house water treatment systems and institutional controls have been implemented and are functioning as intended by the ROD. Phase one of the remedial action (chemical oxidation of the source area groundwater) began on September 10, 2019. Phase two of the remedial action (injections of bio in the downgradient/dissolved phase of the plume) will begin Spring 2020. Injections of chemical oxidants began around August 2020. Injections of bio in the downgradient plume began around January 2021. Manganese oxides have formed in soil pores in the source area and have made injections impossible. Surging of the injection wells with citric acid (to break down the oxides) occurred in the spring of 2021. Groundwater sampling has confirmed that citric acid is unable to break down the manganese oxides and re-open the pore space. Discussions between the EPA, U.S. Geological Survey, State and the PRP will occur to determine an appropriate path forward. OU3 – ICs remain in place and groundwater monitoring continues to occur. The remedy is functioning as intended by the ROD. No detections of contaminants have occurred in more than 10 years. OU3 was deleted from the NPL in October 2021. OU4 – There is very little indication of successful treatment of the contaminated soils based on the one round of post ISCO injection sampling completed in April 2017. Results showed PCE soil contamination in the upper treatment bed between 100,000 ug/kg and 500,000 ug/kg, with one sample result at 1,700,000 ug/kg. There are also high levels of PCE soil contamination around and under the home located at 104 Maiden Lane and appear to be resulting in unacceptable exposures to the resident due to Vapor Intrusion pathways. Several mitigation systems to treat indoor air contamination resulting from the VI pathway have been installed at the residence at 104 Maiden Lane since the previous FYR. Although these systems have decreased the indoor air concentrations of COCs, the most recent sampling event indicates that they are still higher than acceptable levels. On October 19, 2019, the resident was temporarily relocated to remove the health risk associated with TCE and to facilitate additional work that was completed in 2020. The remedy at OU4 is protective in the short-term because the resident at 104 Maiden Lane has been temporarily been relocated and the indoor air numbers at 105 are below EPA action levels. A Focused Feasibililty Study and Proposed Plan have been finalized. The Record of Decision to permanently relocate the resident was completed on June 30, 2021. An Inter-Agency Agreement with the Corps of Engineers was begun in March 2022. The Corps is working with the resident to find an agreeable location for her permanent residency. Once the resident is permanently relocated, the home will be razed and the contaminated soil beneath and around the home will be removed. Soil samples will be taken to confirm if the soil meets the soil cleanup levels.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional Controls were implemented at OU1 in layers to enhance the protectiveness of the remedy. The primary form of IC is an environmental covenant and easement implemented through a prospective purchaser agreement (PPA) between the United States, the state of Missouri, and the Industrial Development Authority of the city of New Haven. The PPA was filed in February 2004. Institutional Controls: OU2 and OU6 are included in a state defined “Special Area 3,” which imposes requirements on well drilling in the designated area to prevent the installation of any well within or near the contamination that may result in an unacceptable human exposure. ICs for the landfarm area (located directly north of the Kellwood facility) are in place to restrict the area to industrial use only. As part of the FYR process, the EPA will inform and educate the owners of the properties where groundwater contamination is present of the potential health hazards posed by COCs and the need to comply with state well installation requirements. ICs have been implemented at OU3 in layers to enhance the protectiveness of the remedy. The primary form of IC is an environmental covenant and easement. The environmental covenant for the OU3 site was filed on April 14, 2008. The primary IC for soils are informational and educational. The EPA uses the FYR process to inform and educate property owners of the potential health hazards posed by the COCs where soil contamination is present. The selected remedy at OU5 utilizes ICs, which involve the use of existing MoDNR well construction requirements and public education to prevent human use of the groundwater.
