TIMES BEACHTIMES BEACH, MO
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 1-square-mile Times Beach Superfund Site is located 20 miles southwest of St. Louis, Missouri. The site is a formerly incorporated city that sprayed its roads with waste oil in order to control dust in the early 1970's. During a 1982 investigation, the EPA discovered that the city used dioxin-contaminated oil. During the same period, the nearby Meramec River flooded the city, and residents had to evacuate their homes. Afterward, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommended the permanent relocation of the evacuated residents. The EPA transferred funds to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the permanent relocation of residents and businesses in 1983. Additionally, the site was added to the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983. All residents successfully relocated by the end of 1986. Cleanup of the site, to include incineration of all dioxin contaminated soil for other eastern Missouri sites, was completed in 1997. The state of Missouri acquired the land and opened Route 66 State Park in September of 1999. The EPA deleted the site from the NPL in 2001.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The EPA provided $30 million to FEMA to relocate residents, businesses and acquisition properties. FEMA finished these actions in 1986. The selected long-term remedy to treat contaminated soils, structures and debris included excavation and thermal treatment of contaminated soil, and disposal of structures and debris. The long-term remedy to stabilize the site included spur levees to control water velocity during flooding and limit erosion of contaminated soils. The EPA completed the spur levee project in 1989. Demolition and disposal of uncontaminated structures and debris finished in 1992. The EPA took over 265,000 tons of dioxin contaminated materials from 27 dioxin-contaminated sites to the Times Beach incinerator for treatment. Excavation and treatment of soils was completed in 1997 when the EPA then demobilized the incinerator. Restoration occurred though site backfilling of clean soil and revegetation.

What Is the Current Site Status?
Remedial action for this site was completed in 1997 and was redeveloped into Route 66 State Park in 1999. The EPA deleted the site from the National Priorities List in 2001.﻿ In 2012, the EPA completed a reassessment of the park to determine, in part, if any residual dioxin contamination remained above the recently revised non-cancer reference dose. The result of the reassessment concluded that current use of the Route 66 State Park does not pose significant health risks to public visitors or park workers.﻿
