Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Vienna Wells Superfund Site consists of three contaminated public drinking water wells and the source area, a former hat factory. The site property is a 7.9-acre parcel of land that begins at the southeast corner of the 10th Street and Chestnut Street intersection. The hat factory (facility) is located at the northwest corner of the site property and consists of two adjoining buildings that form an inverted “L”. From 1952 to 1996, the site property was owned and operated by two companies, Langenberg Inc. and Top This, Inc. Both companies manufactured hats at the facility. Operations at the facility resulted in soil and groundwater contaminated with volatile organic compounds, primarily perchloroethylene (PCE).
The site is separated into two operable units. OU01 (Soil) addresses contaminated soil at and around the facility, and OU02 (Groundwater) addresses the contaminated groundwater plume resulting from activities at the facility.

What Is the Current Site Status?
Selected Remedy The EPA issued a Record of Decision, dated September 28, 2017, that selected a response action for the entire site to address contamination in both soil and groundwater. In April 2020, the site was separated by media into two OUs. The selected remedy for each OU in the 2017 ROD is as follows: OU01 (Soil) – Excavation and Off-site Disposal OU01 (Groundwater) – Groundwater Extraction and Treatment for the Contaminated Shallow Zone and GET for the Contaminated Deep Zone (Using the Existing City Well #3) The selected remedy for OU01 addresses soil contaminated with volatile organic compounds from the source area. The soil remedy is excavation and off-site disposal. The major components of the soil remedy include demolition and disposal of the remaining portions of the building and building foundation; excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil; backfill with clean soil; and institutional controls. The selected remedy for OU02 is groundwater extraction and treatment with groundwater monitoring and institutional controls. The contaminated groundwater plume will be treated by the city’s existing remediation system, or air stripper system. Groundwater monitoring will ensure the contaminant plume is stable or decreasing and contaminant levels are decreasing over time, and institutional controls will restrict groundwater use on the site property and throughout the contaminated plume. Remedial Design/Remedial Action The EPA completed the remedial designs for the soil remedy at OU01 and groundwater remedy at OU02 on June 29, 2022 and May 13, 2020, respectively. Following the remedial design, the EPA awarded the contract to perform the remedial actions at both OU01 and OU02 on September 26, 2022. On-site construction of the soil remedy at OU01 began in February 2023. By May 2023, the remaining portions of the facility, along with the building foundation, were removed and transported to a permitted landfill for disposal. From June 2023 to October 2023, approximately 57,211 tons of contaminated soil were excavated and transported to a permitted landfill for disposal, and the excavation was backfilled with clean soil from a borrow area located off-site. T﻿he groundwater remedy at OU02 was constructed from October 2023 to February 2024. On February 9, 2024, representatives of the EPA and MoDNR performed a joint inspection groundwater remedy at OU02 to mark the end of the construction phase and the beginning of the one-year operational and functional phase for the GETS. The EPA determined the GETS to be operational and functional on February 9, 2025, and the GETS is currently operating, as designed, to meet remedial action objectives.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The groundwater remedy at OU02 includes institutional controls to restrict the use of groundwater in the area of the plume while PCE remains above cleanup levels. The EPA is currently working with owner of the site property on an environmental covenant to satisfy institutional control requirements.

Sampling and Monitoring
The groundwater remedy at OU02 includes routine sampling of the GETS and public water supply to ensure that local residents are not impacted by contamination from the site and the area-wide monitoring well network to onfirm that the GETS is performing, as designed, the achieve remedial action objectives.
