RED PANTHER CHEMICAL COMPANYCLARKSDALE, MS
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Red Panther Chemical Company Superfund site is located in Clarksdale, Mississippi. It includes the area where the Red Panther Chemical Company operated a pesticide formulation plant from 1949 to 1996. The site also includes off-site residential properties affected by contamination from the plant. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 2011, because of contaminated soil resulting from facility operations. EPA, the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) and the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) have investigated site conditions and taken steps to clean up the site.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Site PRPs financed and conducted site investigation and cleanup activities. EPA and MDEQ are provided oversight of all activities. 2002
The site’s PRPs began a short-term cleanup action to address contamination on the Red Panther property. Cleanup activities included removing more than 7,400 tons of contaminated soil from the property; transporting the contaminated soil to commercial hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities; and removing 233,000 pounds of tank sludges from eight aboveground storage tanks. 2005
Sampling activities since 2005 have documented pesticide contamination in surface soil at 26 residences in the 18th Street neighborhood. Contaminant levels at 11 residences exceeded long-term health-risk standards. The PRPs completed the short term cleanup action. 2011
EPA placed the site on the National Priorities List (NPL) in 2011, because of contaminated soil resulting from facility operations. 2016
EPA negotiated with the site’s PRPs to plan for the site’s remedial investigation/feasibility study. 2017
The PRP's contractor initiated field sampling in September 2017. 2018
A second sampling event was conducted in January 2018. The PRP provided a Remedial Investigation Report, Human Health Risk Assessment and Ecological Assessment to EPA and MDEQ in the spring 2018. Notification letters were sent to each residential property owner after review of the sampling results in 2018.
What Is the Current Site Status?
In September 2016, EPA negotiated with the site’s PRPs to plan for the site’s remedial investigation/feasibility study. The Site remedial investigation was conducted over 2017 and 2018. Based on the findings of the remedial investigation, EPA issued a Proposed Plan in May 2019 for public comment. The Proposed Plan recommends No Further Action based upon the findings of the remedial investigation. A public meeting was held on May 21, 2019 in Clarksdale, Mississippi. Upon receiving input from MDEQ and the community, EPA issued the Record of Decision (ROD) as a No Further Action.
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
In 2001, the EPA entered into a legal agreement with the site’s PRPs to conduct a short-term cleanup on the Red Panther property. In 2016, EPA negotiated with the PRPs to plan for site investigation and cleanup activities.
