Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 31.5-acre Picayune Wood Treating Superfund site is located at 403 Davis Street in Picayune, Mississippi. The site consists mostly of flat, undeveloped land. Site surroundings include a commercial and industrial area to the east, an abandoned lumberyard, a public park, a day care center and residences to the south and Southside Elementary School and more residences to the west. Two manmade ditches at the site drain into Mill Creek. Mill Creek flows into the Pearl River, which people use for fishing and boating. Timber and lumber-related operations began in the early 1900s.  Wood-treating operations most likely began around 1946. The Crosby Products Company pressure-treated yellow southern pine wood with preservative chemicals, including creosote. In 1973, Wood Treating, Inc. (WTI) purchased the facility and continued to pressure-treat wood at the site until 1999, when operations ceased. EPA placed the site on the National Priorities List (NPL) in 2004 because of contaminated groundwater, soil and sediment resulting from facility operations. EPA and the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) have investigated site conditions.  By conducting groundwater monitoring, EPA and MDEQ continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Both residents and businesses use the public water system for drinking water, and site contamination has not affected the system. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA leads site investigation and cleanup activities. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) has been working with EPA through an Interagency Agreement. USACE and was responsible for securing a contractor to implement the approved site cleanup plan. 1981
MDEQ and EPA regulated the WTI facility under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) from 1981 to 1999. 1985
Once groundwater contamination was discovered beneath two closed impoundments. WTI closed the cooling water pond and trench impoundments used to manage wastewater and sludge. 1988
A Corrective Action Plan was implemented for groundwater contamination. 1991
WTI installed six recovery wells as part of a pump-and-treat system. This system was installed to recover non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL) and contaminated groundwater. Shortly afterward, WTI dismantled the wood pressure-treating system. 1999 - 2001
All wood-treating operations stopped. Only a few of the original structures remain on site.  EPA began emergency removal cleanup actions in October 1999 to address contaminated areas at the treatment process area. EPA removed waste from all tanks, vats and ditches. Contaminated soil was treated and stockpiled for off-site disposal. 2002
EPA started long-term remedial actions with a remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS). 2004
EPA listed the site on the Superfund National Priorities List (NPL). 2007
EPA issued the cleanup plan (a Record of Decision, or ROD) for the site. It included 
digging up contaminated soil and sediment, placing the material in on-site disposal areas and capping it
treating contaminated groundwater located off site
placing barrier walls around contaminated groundwater on site
institutional controls to limit building on top of the disposal area and to prevent groundwater use
long-term monitoring. 
2007 – 2008
EPA removed contaminated soil from the residential properties and sediments from Mill Creek in 2007 and 2008. About 40,000 cubic yards of soil and sediment were excavated and backfilled. 2011 - 2013
The remedial action in the main wood treatment areas started in 2011. Two 80-foot slurry walls and two soil capped containment cells were installed through 2013. About 180,000 cubic yards of soil has been contained in the cells. Plans for groundwater remediation began in 2013. Groundwater cleanup will include chemical oxidation and biological treatment to remove contamination.  EPA has dug up contaminated soil identified on residential properties near the site and placed the soil in a fenced area on-site. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA's contractor, Black & Veatch, began conducting a groundwater pilot study in March 2018 for treating contaminants through enhanced biological treatment. Full scale treatments are anticipated after the completion of the pilot study. The groundwater activities will continue for about 10 years. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in place to limit building on top of the disposal area and to prevent groundwater use Top of Page