Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Kerr-McGee Chemical Corp – Columbus 90-acre Superfund site is located at 300 North 14th Avenue in Columbus, Mississippi, east of the intersection of North 14th Avenue and North 21st Street. The site boundary includes the former chemical manufacturing facility. In the future, the EPA may expand the boundary to include residential properties. Businesses and neighborhoods, which include low-income and minority residents, surround the site. Schools and daycare facilities are also located nearby. This Site includes the area where Kerr-McGee Chemical and its successor, Tronox Incorporated (Tronox), operated a chemical manufacturing facility from 1928 to 2003. While it operated, Kerr-McGee made pressure-treated railroad products such as wooden cross ties, switch ties and timbers. Operators used creosote and creosote coal tar solutions to make pressure-treated wood products. Operators also used pentachlorophenol (PCP) for wood treating from the 1950s until the mid-1970s. The EPA put the Site on the Superfund Program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 2011 because of contaminated groundwater, sediment and soil caused by facility operations. The EPA and the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) have taken steps to clean up the Site in order to protect the public and the environment from contamination.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The EPA is leading an investigation to find all site-related risks to people and the environment. All the remedial investigation and remedial action activities have been funded through the settlement funds that are being managed by the Multistate Trust. 1990
Kerr-McGee and Tronox conducted many closure activities under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Corrective Action program with State oversight. A groundwater pump-and-treat system has operated on Site under RCRA’s authority since 1990. Each corrective action activity removed contaminated materials from the surface impoundment and a drainage ditch and replaced them with clean soil. 2003
Since July 2003, when facility operations ended, Kerr-McGee and Tronox, removed all tanks, equipment and process buildings. A small office and maintenance building housing groundwater treatment equipment remain on Site. A fence surrounding the site restricts access. 2010 – 2011
The EPA listed the site on the NPL in 2011. Due to the size, complexity and nature of the Site, the cleanup was divided into several Operable Units (OU).
OU-1 – Pine Yard Soils
OU-2 – Residential Properties
OU-3\OU-5 – Former Main Plant
OU-4 – Pine Yard Deep Zone
Moss Street to Waterworks Road Ditch Projects
The EPA conducted three rounds of soil sampling in 2010 and 2011. Based on the results, the EPA dug up and disposed of 278 tons of contaminated soil and then restored the areas, erected a fence to stop access to a possibly contaminated part of a drainage ditch, removed contaminated soils from Hunt Intermediate School, Maranatha Faith Center and a nearby residential property on Moss Street. 2014
The EPA expedited sampling activities in and around the 14th Avenue Ditch based on a request from city officials and the Memphis Town Community Advisory Group (CAG). In November 2014, the remediation and road widening project began. Working under a Superfund Time Critical decision document issued by the EPA, the Multistate Trust first excavated the new ditch and placed a clean soil buffer so the City’s contractors could construct the new concrete drainage ditch without coming in contact with contaminants from the Site. 2015
The 14th Avenue Ditch Improvement Project and Road Widening Project was completed in July 2015. A ribbon cutting ceremony was held to recognize key members and the community on the success of this project. 2017
Remediation and construction activities on 7th Avenue, from Waterworks to Probst Park, were completed in January 2017. 2018
A Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) was conducted to address contamination identified in portions of the Pine Yard (Operable Unit 1 or OU-1). Upon completion of the FFS, the EPA issued a Proposed Plan to address soils in OU-1 in December 2018. The Greenfield Multistate Trust began a voluntary removal action in portions of the Pine Yard (Operable Unit 1), under the authority of a workplan approved by the EPA and MDEQ, pursuant to the Tronox Bankruptcy settlement agreement. The voluntary removal action is being taken by the Trust, in portions of the pine yard, to expedite the cleanup and redevelopment of the Site. 2019-2023
Operable Unit 1 (OU-1) — Pine Yard • Grading and seeding reinitiated in December 2021, but completion was delayed due to weather. The EPA issued the ROD for OU1 in May 2019, selecting a soil excavation and institutional controls remedy, and approved the OU1 remedial action completion report and addendum in April 2022.. Much of the 44-acre Pine Yard, outside of the wetlands, is now ready for reuse. Operable Unit 2 (OU-2) — Contaminated Soil on Off-site Properties • Cleanup finished at nine of the 10 off-site parcels. The remaining cleanup in OU-2 includes a property that requires excavation of surface and subsurface soil near the roots of mature trees. Based on the recommendation of a local arborist, in order to increase the survival rate of the trees, the remaining cleanup activities should be conducted during the winter when the trees are dormant. As a result, OU-2 activities were completed in 2024. The Deceember 2024 Remedial Action Completion Report Approval Memorandum documents the EPA's approval of the completion of the cleanup activities required by the Septembr 2020, OU2 ROD Former Main Plant Area (OU-3/OU-5) — The revised draft Feasibility Study (FS) for OU-3 and OU-5 was submitted to the EPA and MDEQ in October 2021. The EPA provided comments to the Trust in May 2022. The EPA, MDEQ and the Trust are working to finalize the FS. The EPA expects to issue a proposed plan identifying a preferred cleanup alternative by December 2023. .The combined OU3 and OU5 Proposed Plan issued in October 2023 for this ROD included an interim remedy for OU5. During the public comment period for the OU3 and OU5 Proposed Plan, the EPA received a request to select and implement an alternative for OU5 that was not considered in the proposed plan (i.e., excavate and remove contaminated soil that exceed the construction worker scenario). After careful consideration, the EPA has determined that the requested remedy change is one that public could not have been reasonably anticipated based on information in the original Proposed Plan [see NCP at 40 CFR 300.430(f)(3)(ii)(B)].  As a result on September 30, 2024, the EPA issued a ROD addressing OU3 only.
The overall cleanup strategy for OU3 is to control the source of groundwater contamination (namely DNAPL below the water table) through containment and to prevent human exposure to contaminated surface and subsurface soils. The source control components of the OU3 remedy will support the eventual restoration of groundwater outside the containment area to its beneficial use as a potential source of drinking water.
The EPA will address OU5 separately in a future ROD.. Moss Street to Waterworks Road Ditch Project — Cleanup was completed in late 2021. The City of Columbus accepted the ditch restoration work in April 2022. The Removal Action Completion Report was approved by EPA in April 2022.
What Is the Current Site Status?
 The EPA’s Site strategy has been to address immediate cleanup needs by reducing exposure pathways to nearby residents with removal or remedial actions and to use an operable unit strategy to work from the simplest to the most complex challenges at the site. This OU3 cleanup decision follows actions to address exposure in residential yards (OU2) and the soil‑only contamination in OU1. After the OU3 cleanup, most of the acreage impacted by the Site will be addressed and suitable for compatible reuse.
The Multistate Trust continues to operate the onsite groundwater recovery and treatment plant to keep contaminated groundwater from moving off site. Operable Unit 1 (OU-1) — Pine Yard • Grading and seeding reinitiated in December 2021, but completion was delayed due to weather. The EPA issued the ROD for OU1 in May 2019, selecting a soil excavation and institutional controls remedy, and approved the OU1 remedial action completion report and addendum in April 2022.
Much of the 44-acre Pine Yard, outside of the wetlands, is now ready for reuse. Operable Unit 2 (OU-2) — Contaminated Soil on Off-site Properties • Cleanup finished at all 10 off-site parcels. The Deceember 2024 Remedial Action Completion Report Approval Memorandum documents the EPA's approval of the completion of the cleanup activities required by the Septembr 2020, OU2 ROD Former Main Plant Area (OU-3/OU-5) — The revised draft Feasibility Study (FS) for OU-3 and OU-5 was submitted to the EPA and MDEQ in October 2021. The EPA provided comments to the Trust in May 2022. The EPA, MDEQ and the Trust are working to finalize the FS. The EPA issued a proposed plan identifying preferred cleanup alternatives on October 26, 2023. The combined OU3 and OU5 Proposed Plan issued in October 2023 for this ROD included an interim remedy for OU5. During the public comment period for the OU3 and OU5 Proposed Plan, the EPA received a request to select and implement an alternative for OU5 that was not considered in the proposed plan (i.e., excavate and remove contaminated soil that exceed the construction worker scenario). After careful consideration, the EPA has determined that the requested remedy change is one that public could not have been reasonably anticipated based on information in the original Proposed Plan [see NCP at 40 CFR 300.430(f)(3)(ii)(B)].  As a result on September 30, 2024, the EPA issued a ROD addressing OU3 only. The overall cleanup strategy for OU3 is to control the source of groundwater contamination (namely DNAPL below the water table) through containment and to prevent human exposure to contaminated surface and subsurface soils. The source control components of the OU3 remedy will support the eventual restoration of groundwater outside the containment area to its beneficial use as a potential source of drinking water.
The EPA will address OU5 separately in a future ROD.. Moss Street to Waterworks Road Ditch Project — Cleanup was completed in late 2021. The City of Columbus accepted the ditch restoration work in April 2022. The Removal Action Completion Report was approved by the EPA in April 2022.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The EPA has determined that the public water supply wells are not impacted by the Site. Most residents and businesses nearby use the public water system for drinking water. Multiple fences around the facility properties restrict access to the Site.

Sampling and Monitoring
Tap water samples were collected from nearby residents who expressed concerns about the quality of drinking water from residents near the Site, the EPA, the Trust and MDEQ coordinated these sampling efforts with homeowners, Mississippi Bureau of Public Drinking Water Supply, Columbus Light and Water and the local health department. The results of the tap water sampling activities showed no impacts from Site related contamination. The EPA has completed a significant amount of i sampling soil, sediment, and groundwater on the former manufacturing facility, ditches near the former manufacturing facility that may have been a migration pathway, and contaminated soils and sediments from stormwater ditche and residential properties that exceed unacceptable risk levels have been addressed by remedial action activities. The combined OU3 and OU5 Proposed Plan issued in October 2023 for this ROD included an interim remedy for OU5. During the public comment period for the OU3 and OU5 Proposed Plan, the EPA received a request to select and implement an alternative for OU5 that was not considered in the proposed plan (i.e., excavate and remove contaminated soil that exceed the construction worker scenario). After careful consideration, the EPA has determined that the requested remedy change is one that public could not have been reasonably anticipated based on information in the original Proposed Plan [see NCP at 40 CFR 300.430(f)(3)(ii)(B)].  As a result, on September 30, 2024, the EPA issued a ROD for OU3 only and will address OU5 separately in a future ROD. The overall cleanup strategy for OU3 is to control the source of groundwater contamination (namely DNAPL below the water table) through containment and to prevent human exposure to contaminated surface and subsurface soils. The source control components of the OU3 remedy will support the eventual restoration of groundwater outside the containment area to its beneficial use as a potential source of drinking water.

Emergency Response and Removal
As a part of a removal site evaluation, the EPA led three rounds of soil sampling in 2010 and 2011. Based on the soil sampling results, the EPA dug up and disposed of 278 tons of contaminated soil, and then restored the areas. As a part of a removal site evaluation, the EPA led three rounds of soil sampling in 2010 and 2011. Based on the soil sampling results, the EPA dug up and disposed of 278 tons of contaminated soil, and then restored the areas.
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA's mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws. In 2011, as part of a bankruptcy settlement, Tronox transferred ownership of the site to a Multistate Environmental Response Trust. The Trust was created in the settlement to take ownership of this and other Tronox properties. The Trustee, The Greenfield Environmental Multistate Trust LLC, is funding the site’s remedial investigation/feasibility study.
