Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 4.5-acre Mouat Industries site is located in Columbus, Montana. From 1957 to 1962, Mouat Industries processed chromite ore mined from the Stillwater Mining Complex in south-central Montana. The process generated wastes containing sodium chromate and sodium dichromate. Waste piles leached contamination into the soil and groundwater. Further contamination resulted from sodium dichromate spills during normal facility operations. Cleanup of soils and groundwater was completed between 1990 and 2008. Following cleanup at the site, operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Samples taken during the late 1970s and early 1980s indicated that water from sampled monitoring wells exceeded the recommended drinking water standards for chromium. In 1984, EPA sent a letter to the town of Columbus stating that the wells exceeded the recommended drinking water standards for chromium and recommended that the contaminated groundwater not be used for human and animal consumption. Mouat Industries became a Superfund site in 1986. Contaminated soils and groundwater have been addressed through several removal actions conducted between 1990 and 2008. These removal actions, or short-term cleanups, were conducted to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. They included securing the site with a perimeter fence; controlling stormwater flow; demolishing the former processing facility; and containerizing or relocating wastes and contaminated soil. Removal actions also included treating contaminated soil; excavating and disposing of some contaminated soil; and covering excavated areas with clean soil and vegetation. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
You may need Adobe Reader to view files on this page. See EPA’s About PDF page to learn more. ﻿Following soil cleanup, EPA partially deleted the soil component of the site from the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in 2009. 
NPL Partial Site Deletion Narrative (pdf) (2 pp, 6.2 MB). 
Groundwater monitoring is ongoing. The site’s long-term remedy includes monitored natural attenuation of chromium contaminated groundwater (the site’s only contaminant of concern); institutional controls; and excavation, treatment, stabilization and on-site disposal of contaminated soil. The removal actions that addressed impacted soils resulted in waste being left on site; therefore, EPA has conducted four five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The fourth five-year review (pdf) (51 pp, 6 MB) in 2023 concluded that the repository cap over the treated soils and drainage features around the repository are intact and maintained by the Town of Columbus. Chromium groundwater quality standards have episodic exceedances when groundwater comes into contact with the treated soils underlying the repository. Institutional controls (ICs) are in place and are being properly operated, maintained, and enforced by the Town of Columbus. The current report concludes that the remedy at the site is protective in the short-term but may not be protective in the future; therefore, more investigation and evaluation of the site is ongoing. . Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The town of Columbus, as a potentially responsible party, complied with the 1996 Unilateral Administrative Order by establishing and implementing institutional controls at the site in the form of a zoning ordinance. The institutional controls are listed as Appendix D in the Post Removal Site Control Plan (pdf) (212 pp, 109.3 MB). The town of Columbus has maintained the institutional controls as part of its response actions as a responsible party under Superfund. The zoning ordinance was approved by town council in March 1995 and created the Superfund Overlay District (SOD). The intent of the SOD is to protect public health, safety and welfare while allowing appropriate use of lands within the district. This intent is accomplished by: 
Assuring that land use in the SOD is compatible with protecting and providing for permanent preservation and maintenance of response actions pursuant to the Superfund law, including soil caps, treated concrete blocks, and other remedial structures.
Requiring that any development within the block placement area (treated soil repository) of the SOD be preceded by submittal of detailed site and construction plans, prepared by an architect or engineer, for review and approval by the town.
Requiring submittal of as-built drawings with certification from an architect or engineer that site development and construction within the block placement area (treated soil repository) was completed in compliance with zoning title and federal Superfund law.
Limiting well use and prohibiting drilling of wells (except for monitoring wells) within the SOD.
Placing a notice to purchasers on any deed, contract for sale or other instrument of conveyance before any lot or parcel in the SOD is conveyed. 
Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Groundwater sampling was conducted between June 29 and July 1, 2021 from all monitoring wells as part of the site wide five-year review sampling specified in the updated Post Removal Site Control Plan (pdf) (212 pp, 109.3 MB) 
﻿Mouat Industries Superfund Site 2021 Groundwater Monitoring Results Final Report (pdf) (56 pp, 7.8 MB) 
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
In 1990, EPA issued an action memorandum (pdf) (43 pp, 1.5 MB) to initiate a time-critical removal action to (1) secure the site and to mitigate the threat of direct contact to hazardous materials to on-site workers and nearby individuals, and (2) provide run-on, run-off drainage control for the site. EPA erected a chain link fence around the area of contaminated soils. At the request of EPA, the town of Columbus redirected an existing drainage ditch that channeled runoff directly onto contaminated soils at the site. In 1991, EPA issued a second action memorandum (pdf) (43 pp, 1.6 MB) selecting on-site treatment as the primary removal alternative with off-site disposal of soils as a back-up. In 1993, the soil treatment plant was constructed and the treatment process included soil screening, chemical addition for chromium reduction, and Portland cement addition for soil fixation. 
The treated soils were formed into 5' × 5' × 6' blocks for curing, testing, and placement.
Approximately 14,000 cubic yards of chromium-containing soil were treated, creating approximately 7,000 blocks that were placed back in the excavated areas.
The treatment process rendered the contaminants as a less toxic and immobile chromium.
Non-treated, relatively clean soil was used as fill. 
In response to the town of Columbus’s concern about final site configuration and future land use considerations, EPA changed the response action to the off-site disposal alternative in 1994. 
Approximately 19,400 cy of chromium-containing soil were disposed of off-site.
Upon completion of contaminated soil excavation and transport off-site, treated soil blocks formed in 1993 and untreated soil with chromium concentrations below action levels were placed in the excavation area.
The blocks and non-treated soil were covered with two feet of clean fill and graded to a slight slope to facilitate run-off.
A portion of the excavated and filled area was vegetated and the remainder of it was covered in gravel. 
In 1996, an action memorandum (pdf) (78 pp, 4.1 MB) selected monitored natural attenuation to address the remaining chromium contaminated groundwater. Since concentrations in the groundwater dropped significantly once soil contamination stopped sourcing the groundwater, EPA determined that a more passive approach to cleanup was appropriate. By 2002, cleanup levels for groundwater were met downgradient of the treated soil. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
In 1991, EPA issued an Administrative Order on Consent (AOC) (pdf) (35 pp, 1.4 MB) to all the identified potentially responsible parties (PRPs) that directed the removal and treatment of on-site contaminated soils. In 1996, EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order (UAO) (pdf) (91 pp, 5.4 MB) to all PRPs notified in the 1991 AOC. The UAO required implementation of a Non-Time Critical Removal Action to treat the chromium contaminated groundwater. Top of Page