Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
​​The Idaho Pole Co. (IPC) Superfund site is north of Bozeman, Montana in Gallatin County. The site includes about 87 acres. About 65 acres are owned by Idaho Pole Co. A small section of Interstate 90 (I-90) crosses the property.  ​Between the late 1800s and early 1940s, the company that would one day be Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway Company (BNSF) ran a five-stall roundhouse south of Cedar Street and east of L Street. The IPC wood treating facility began running in 1945 using creosote to preserve wood. In 1952, the facility switched to pentachlorophenol (PCP) in carrier oil (similar to fuel oil like diesel) for the wood treating solution.   ​Historical work on the site included pole treatment in butt vats with the later addition of pressurized heated retort equipment in the area south of Cedar Street. Treated poles were stacked for drying and shipment in the area. Pole treatment work included pole peeling with a bark-fill area for wood waste north of Cedar Street.   ​In 1975, a pressurized heated retort was added for treating full-length poles. The pole-length vats were taken away in the early 1980s. There was also a drying area where treated poles were stored before shipment. IPC continued wood treating with a pressurized heated retort and butt-dipping vat until September 1997, when the company stopped doing the wood-treatment ​.  
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
​​In 1978, the Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks notified the Montana Department of Health & Environmental Services (MDHES), which is now called the Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), that they thought there had been a release of oily wood treating fluid from the plant.   ​MDHES found evidence of a release in ditches near the facility and near Rocky Creek. After that, MDHES issued an order, telling IPC to stop uncontrolled releases and to clean up spilled treating fluid. The company built an trench along a part of the property line to stop some of the wood treating fluids from getting into the groundwater. In 1983, the EPA and the State of Montana sampled the trench and found that wood treating chemicals were moving away from the plant.  ​In 1984, the EPA proposed for the facility to be added to the National Priorities List. The facility was listed as a Superfund site on June 10, 1986. A Record of Decision (pdf) (224 pp, 95.4 MB)(ROD) that chose the site remedy was issued in September 1992. Since then, Explanations of Significant Differences (ESDs) that made changes to the remedy were issued in 1996 (pdf) (10 pp, 618.3 KB) and 1998 (pdf) (8 pp, 51.7 KB). ​The ROD found the following chemicals, called “contaminants of concern,” at the site:  
​pentachlorophenol (PCP) 
​polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) 
​polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins 
​polychlorinated dibenzofurans (dioxins/furans).   
​You can learn more about these chemicals here:  
ATSDR-TOXFAQS
Contaminants at Superfund Sites 
​The ROD also explained that there needed to be a single response action to treat soil and groundwater contamination.  ​To protect human health, response work has been designed to stop people from touching, breathing, eating or drinking contaminated soils and groundwater through treatment, engineering controls (such as capping), and institutional controls.  ​To protect the environment, Idaho Pole Company (IPC), supervised by the EPA and Montana DEQ, has removed sources of contamination and treated contaminated groundwater through an enhanced in-situ biodegradation process; in place treatment using the natural microorganisms to break down these contaminants.  
​The initial groundwater remedy, called the groundwater recovery system, is made up of extraction/injection well galleries south of I-90 with a water treatment plant that could treat around 100 gallons per minute.  
​The groundwater recovery system began running in February 1997 and treated over 624 million gallons through December 2016. 
​Overall, about 60 pounds of PAHs and 290 pounds of PCP were removed from the groundwater since start up in 1997.  
​Over time, the groundwater recovery system became less effective at removing contaminants from the groundwater. In 2016, IPC placed the groundwater recovery system in stand-by mode with EPA approval. Explanation for the shutdown was because it was removing less contaminants (less than 2 pounds per year since 2012) and there was little difference between changes in downgradient PCP concentrations and groundwater recovery system work.   ​In July 2016, IPC injected nitrate-rich nutrients into the rest of the groundwater source area south of I-90. The goal of the injections was to look at the whether bacteria could lower the amount of  PCP and the carrier fuel used to apply the PCP for wood treatment. This was done by providing a food source for bacteria in the area where there was contamination in the groundwater.   ​After that, sampling showed a big improvement in groundwater. Monitoring of some of the wells continued for one year to determine whether active water treatment could be stopped. Instead, a more passive approach could be used that would use native bacteria to eat the remaining contaminants below ground.  
Groundwater Recovery System Temporary Shutdown Request (pdf) (389 pp, 6.1 MB)
Groundwater Recovery System ﻿Temporary Shutdown Approval (pdf) (2 pp, 169.3 MB) 
The pilot test study work plans are available: Phase I Work Plan (pdf) (34 pp, 1.9 MB) and Phase II Work Plan (pdf) (75 pp, 2.8 MB). Test results from the Phase I pilot test are in the Phase II pilot test work plan and the results from the Phase II pilot test are in the 2016 Pilot Study Report (pdf) (526 pp, 10 MB) fter the groundwater recovery system was stopped, monitoring showed a lower level of contamination in the groundwater plume and a shrinking of the total contamination in the plume.  In 2018, EPA, with help from MDEQ, approved permanent shutdown of the groundwater recovery system, and the system was decommissioned.  
Idaho Pole Site Groundwater Remedy System Decommissioning Plan (pdf) (10 pp, 1.2 MB) 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Soil The site’s long-term remedy was selected in the 1992 Record of Decision (ROD). There were also changes to the remedy after the ROD, called “explanations of significant differences.” The remedy included digging up 24,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil and placement of the soil the was excavated into a land treatment unit.   Soil cleanup began in 1995 and finished in 2002. Treated soil was placed on site and covered with 12 inches of clean dirt to prevent people from touching, drinking, eating or breathing the contaminated soil. All the construction requirements for treatment of the soils at the site have been met. You can read more about that in the 1998 Preliminary Site Close Out Report (pdf) (11 pp, 638.7 KB) and the 2002 Remedial Action Completion Report (pdf) (199 pp, 23.4 MB). Approximately 24,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil were dug up from the site and successfully treated in the Land Treatment Unit. After treatment, the soil was used as backfill in several areas on IPC property south of I-90. Treated soil was placed above historic high groundwater levels and covered with at least 12 inches of clean soil to prevent people from touching, eating, drinking, or breathing in contamination.  In early 2020, EPA deleted the soils that needed no additional cleanup from the National Priorities List. This includes surface and subsurface soils outside of the Treated Soils Area.   
EPA’s response to public comments on the partial deletion (pdf) (20 pp, 1.8 MB) 
In December 2023, Scout DAC LLC’s contractor took soil samples to study dioxin and to write a treatability study. The treatability study will see if adding amendments to the soils will lower dioxin levels in the soil. Scout is considering combining the Treated Soils Area once the city has approved their building plan.   
Treated Soils Area Work Plan (pdf) (253 pp, 18 MB) 
Groundwater The latest five-year review in 2020 showed that groundwater contaminant levels didn’t meet groundwater standards and recommended more treatment of the groundwater source area.   In August and September 2022, Idaho Pole Company injected amendments into the groundwater source area south of I-90 and two downgradient barriers north of I-90. The source area was first treated because that is the main source of contamination in the soil and groundwater. The two downgradient areas were treated by creating a wall below ground to clean up contaminated groundwater while also letting groundwater flow through it. This is called a permeable reactive barrier. It would reduce current contamination and stop left over wood treating fluids from moving downgradient in the future.   The EPA and Montana DEQ recently updated the workplan for the Administrative Order on Consent to change groundwater monitoring points and allow targeted amendments to the groundwater.  
In-Situ Amendment Completion Report November 2022 (pdfF) (168 pp, 40 MB)
Administrative Order on Consent Groundwater Monitoring Workplan September 2023 (pdf) (425 pp, 10 MB)
Groundwater Semi-Annual Monitoring﻿ Report October 2023 (pdf) (195 pp, 24 MB)
Groundwater In-Situ Workplan December 2023 (pdf) (27 pp, 6 MB)﻿ 
Five-Year Reviews Some waste has been left on site at levels that limits use of the site so the EPA has done five five-year reviews at the site. These reviews make sure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and work as they were supposed to.   The fifth five-year review (pdf) (65 pp, 8.1 MB) of the remedial work at the site was finished in September 2020. Based on this review, and the Attachments for Fifth Five Year Review Report (pdf) (237 pp, 41.1 MB), the EPA has found that the remedy now protects human health and the environment. Institutional controls are in place, for example a deed restriction on IPC property and  controls that stop people from drinking the groundwater.  To protect human health and the environment in the long term, the following things need to be done:   
Install and sample additional wells in the downgradient portion of the groundwater plume. 
Change the remedy to address residual source area contamination. 
Update the site operation and maintenance plan to identify a formal schedule for inspection and how to solve identified problems  
The next five-year review will be finished in 2025 to review the how well the remedies on the site are working.  Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Controlled Groundwater Use Area (CGA) was issued by the Montana Natural Resources and Conservation in 2001. This CGA limits the use of groundwater beneath the site for any purpose, except as listed in the remedial action or allowed by the EPA and MDEQ.  ​A Notice of Institutional Controls that has been recorded on Idaho Pole Company property that includes the following restrictions:  
​Construction (other than surface paving, landscaping curbs, light standards, traffic signs and greenways) is not allowed in the Treated Soils Area, except as allowed by the EPA and MDEQ or provided in the Remedial Action. 
​Digging deeper than 12-inches is not allowed in the Treated Soils Area, except if allowed in the Remedial Action. 
​Digging inside the CGA is not allowed without EPA and DEQ permission. 
​Groundwater use within the CGA requires EPA and DEQ approval. 
​Development (including potential housing) on the site requires EPA and DEQ approval. 
The Controlled Groundwater Area (pdf) (6 pp, 774.8 K) and the Notice of Institutional Controls (pdf) (14 pp, 786 K) for the site are available for review. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
​​Many wells are monitored twice a year to look at how well of the groundwater remedy is working. Groundwater data collected since 1997 and groundwater modelling done in 2007 show that the amount of contamination in groundwater plume has gone down significantly since putting the remedy in place. Eight wells on peoples’ homes downgradient and north of I-90 are also tested once a year. Contaminants have not been found in the wells of homes since sampling began in the 1990s.   ​Three monitoring wells were put in the downgradient part of the plume in early October 2020. This was recommended by the fifth five-year review. These wells have been sampled twice a year since then with results reported in annual progress reports. All results have been below cleanup levels. Another groundwater monitoring well was put in June 2022 west of the East Gallatin substation as part of the in-situ injection monitoring recommended in the 2020 five-year review.  
2020 Annual Groundwater Report (pdf) (346 pp, 59 MB)
2022 Spring Semi-Annual Groundwater Report (pdf) (136 pp, 6 MB)
2022 Fall Semi-Annual Groundwater Report (pdf) (263 pp, 34 MB)
2023 Spring Semi-Annual Groundwater Report (pdf) (231 pp, 18 MB)
2023 Fall Semi-Annual Groundwater Report (pdf) (195 pp, 27 MB) 
Top of Page
Enforcement Information
After the 1992 ROD was signed, the EPA started negotiations with the Idaho Pole Company (IPC) and Burlington Northern Railway Company (BNSF) (potentially responsible parties or PRPs). The EPA wanted them to work on the remedy, including remedial design (RD) and remedial action (RA). These negotiations did not work and so the EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order (UAO) (pdf) (55 pp, 3 MB, About PDF)on August 26, 1993. This order required that the PRPs start the RD/RA process. EPA supervised the PRP RD/RA work and MDEQ also helped.  ​In July 2022, EPA signed an Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent with IPC to do more groundwater work to support the focused feasibility study, including injecting chemicals into the subsurface to break down contaminants and monitoring.   
Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent July 2022 (pdf) (569 pp, 22 MB) 
Top of Page