Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Anaconda Co. Smelter site covers more than 200 square miles of the southern end of the Deer Lodge Valley in Montana, at and near the location of the former Anaconda Copper Mining Company ore processing facilities. In 1884, ACM and its predecessors started large copper concentrating and smelting operations at the area presently known as the Old Works. The Old Works was located on the north side of Warm Springs Creek next to the town of Anaconda and operated until about 1901. Around 1902, ore processing and smelting operations began at the Washoe Reduction Works (also called the Anaconda Smelter, the Washoe Smelter, the New Works, and the Anaconda Reduction Works) on Smelter Hill, south of the Old Works and east of Anaconda. In 1977, Atlantic Richfield Company purchased the Anaconda Co. Smelter. Operations at the Anaconda Smelter ceased in 1980 and the smelter facilities were dismantled soon thereafter. Over a century of milling and smelting operations, high concentrations of arsenic, lead, copper, cadmium, and zinc were produced. These wastes contaminated soil, groundwater and surface water with hazardous chemicals. In September 1983, EPA placed the Anaconda Co. Smelter site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List to address the contamination. EPA is the lead agency with Atlantic Richfield Co. conducting site activities through administrative orders. Cleanup is complete at several areas within the site. At these areas, operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. Cleanup is underway at the remaining areas. Remedies that have been completed are currently protective of human health and the environment. Where remedies are not complete, access is controlled to prevent human exposure to waste. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
You may need Adobe Reader to view files on this page. See EPA’s About PDF page to learn more. ​Remedies completed to date are currently protective of human health and the environment. Where remedies are not complete, access is controlled to prevent human exposure to waste.  ​In 2020, EPA completed the sixth five-year review (pdf) (138 pp, 12.4 MB) of cleanup actions at the Anaconda Smelter site. Five-year reviews evaluate the implementation and performance of the remedy to determine whether it remains protective of human health and the environment. A fact sheet (pdf) (2 pp, 957 KB) is available that provides an overview of the five-year review. Work completed at the site includes: 
​Over 1,600 residential and commercial properties have been cleaned up. 
​Over 200 attics have been cleaned up under a county-run Attic Abatement program. 
​A free Blood Lead Level monitoring program began at the Community Hospital of Anaconda under the terms of the site-wide Consent Decree. 
​All domestic wells and/or water supplies have been tested and/or remediated within the site. Wells are sampled/treated on a continuing basis. 
​Over 3 million cubic yards of waste have been removed from the community and consolidated onto Atlantic Richfield Co. property. 
​Over 5,000 acres of the former smelter facility and disposal areas have been capped and revegetated. 
​Nearly 1,000 acres of new wetlands have been constructed and another 5,000 acres protected. 
​Over 15,000 acres of adjacent contaminated soils have been reclaimed and support wildlife and grazing lands. 
​140,000 feet of stormwater controls have been placed to reduce contaminated sediments from impacting streams. 
​30,000 feet of stream have been restored, providing for a high-quality fishery.​ 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Frequently Asked Questions A﻿bout Sampling Q: Is my home eligible for sampling?
A:  If you are in the area of the Anaconda Superfund Overlay (see map below, within the magenta area), you can request sampling by visiting Community Soils Operable Unit Soil Sampling Request  (https://tinyurl.com/csousampling).
Additionally, Atlantic Richfield is sending letters to inform residents of their eligibility for cleanup. EPA recommends you request sampling now. Most homes have already been sampled and this may be your last opportunity to participate for the immediate future.  
Q: How long after sampling will it take to remediate my yard?
A: Results are typically provided within a couple of months and the remediation, if needed, typically happens in the next possible field season pending your consent for access for the remediation.  
Q: I still have questions about sampling, or I’d like to speak to someone about the results I received.
A: Please reach out to the EPA project manager for the site, Bryan Lobar (lobar.bryan@epa.gov). 
Q: Does this last call apply to the Attic Dust sampling and removal program?
A: No. This last call applies only to yard sampling Q: If I wait to have my yard sampled, will it still qualify for a future cleanup if a new lead action level is implemented for the site?
A:  We encourage you to consider sampling and cleanup now, as this is an opportunity to address the areas of your yard with any high levels of lead and/or arsenic contamination now, before the current yard cleanup program ends.  Whether a yard qualifies for future cleanup will depend on particulars of the future decision. In past changes to yard cleanups, previously remediated homes have been revisited and, in some cases, further cleanup actions were taken. Q: Who is responsible for funding and carrying out the soil cleanup in Anaconda?
A: Atlantic Richfield, under a Consent Decree with the United States and the State of Montana, funds and implements soil cleanup in Anaconda as part of the site’s long-term remedial action with EPA oversight. EPA is committed to protecting human health and the environment and ensuring Anaconda residents are informed and engaged throughout this process. Q: How will the new lead guidance impact ongoing and future cleanup activities in Anaconda?
A: Changes to EPA guidance do not have an immediate effect on ongoing cleanups. Regular review of the protectiveness of current cleanups is a standard part of the Superfund process. The seventh “5 Year Review” will be completed next year (Sept 2025) to assess current protectiveness of the remedy and will include review of the protectiveness of the current lead action level.
The EPA will continue to work closely with the community to provide clear timelines and resources to ensure the safety and wellbeing of Anaconda residents. Q: Are there any circumstances in which I may request yard sampling and cleanup after 2024.
A: Yes, there are limited cases.  As summarized in Section 3.1.6 of the 2022 Consent Decree Statement of Work, if a landowner within the CSOU fails or refuses to request sampling or to provide access for RA activities on his or her property by the end of 2024, to allow for completion of RA activities by the end of 2025, that property will not be eligible for future response actions until one of the following conditions are met: 
(i)property ownership changes; 
(ii) a member of a sensitive population group resides at the property; 
(iii) a person residing at the property is found to have a confirmed blood lead reading above 5 micrograms/deciliter (μg/dl); or 
(iv) the landowner requests and AR agrees to perform remediation post-2025.  Q: I requested yard sampling, but don’t yet have the results or I have results but I am still waiting for remediation. What can I do to protect my family?
A: There are several steps you can take:
1) Get tested- To find if you or a family member may have elevated lead levels in your body, blood lead tests at the Anaconda Community Hospital are free to site residents, paid for by AR.  
2) To learn more about free local resources such as tested gardening soil, call, email or stop in at the local Superfund Institutional Control Program office: 406-563-7476, (superfund@adlc.us), 186 Landfill Road, Anaconda, MT 59711.
3) EPA has additional informational resources about steps people can take to reduce lead exposure: Protect Your Family from Sources of Lead 
Based on the January 2024 Updated Lead Guidance, the EPA is evaluating the risks from lead in soils to sensitive populations. This analysis will include compiling available site data to determine the potential presence and extent of lead-contaminated soils. Lead can pose health risks to sensitive populations, especially children under 7 years old and pregnant or nursing women. The process to implement the Updated Lead Guidance will involve additional planning, data gathering, risk assessment and funding requests. EPA will coordinate with our state partners and request public feedback on our proposed cleanup plans before additional cleanups begin.  While implementing the Updated Lead Guidance may take several years to complete, the EPA and Montana Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) will share information on planned activities and results as they become available. In the meantime, and out of an abundance of caution, if you live near the Anaconda Co. Smelter Superfund Site, the EPA recommends you have your children tested for lead annually; especially those under 7 and if the soil at your property was not replaced previously. Additionally, you can take some simple actions to limit exposure to potential lead contamination in soils, including:  
Maintaining yards and other soil cover;  
Washing hands, especially children’s, after handling soil, playing outside, and before meals; 
Making sure children eat nutritious meals high in iron and calcium; 
Keeping dust levels down by mopping and damp dusting regularly;  
Regularly changing out furnace filters; 
Keeping kids’ toys and play areas clean; 
Taking shoes off at the door and keeping pets clean; 
Wearing gloves while gardening; and 
Cleaning homegrown produce and peeling root vegetables.  
The EPA Anaconda Co. Smelter Superfund Site team will communicate with residents affected by this guidance about the specific next steps the Agency will take in their community. Residents may also contact the site’s Community Involvement Coordinator with questions or concerns at (barnicoat.dana@epa.gov) or 406-457-5007. 
The site consists of multiple areas, referred to by EPA as operable units (OUs). OU15, Mill Creek: The remedy (pdf) (199 pp, 9.4 MB), selected in 1987, included permanently relocating all Mill Creek residents, removing demolition debris and contaminated soils for later disposal, regrading and replanting areas disturbed by relocation/demolition activities, monitoring and maintaining the vegetation, and controlling access to the area. Construction of the remedy finished in late 1988. This OU was deleted in 2023. Operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. OU11, Flue Dust: The remedy (pdf) (268 pp, 13 MB), selected in 1991, included stabilization of about 316,500 cubic yards of flue dust, placement of the treated materials in an engineered repository, long-term maintenance and monitoring, and institutional controls. The remedy required that the repository include a liner, leak detection and collection system, groundwater monitoring wells, and a cap. Construction of the remedy finished in September 1996. This OU was deleted in 2020. Operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. OU12 and OU9, Arbiter and Beryllium: Similar to Flue Dust OU11, Arbiter OU12 and Beryllium OU9 were created to address principal threat wastes that were identified during the early stages of remedial investigations at the Site. Arbiter Works was a hydrometallurgical copper refining plant that operated intermittently from 1974 to 1977. Beryllium was comprised of two plants for flake-metal and a beryllium oxide pilot, which operated within the Smelter Hill complex from 1964 to 1968. EPA released an Action Memorandum (pdf) (62 pp, 37 MB) that included removal and consolidation of wastes from the Arbiter Works and beryllium plants into engineered repository located on Smelter Hill that meets RCRA Subtitle C storage facility requirements; and long-term monitoring and ICs, including site access control. These OUs were deleted in 2020. Operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. OU7, Old Works/East Anaconda Development Area: The remedy (pdf) (276 pp, 11 MB), selected in 1994, included placement of engineered covers over waste, treatment of soils, surface water controls, upgrades or repairs to streambank levees, replacement or repairs to bridges, institutional controls, long-term monitoring and preservation of historic features. OU7 consists of six subareas. Construction is complete at five of the six areas. Construction at the sixth area, the Industrial Area, is nearly complete. OU16, Community Soils: The remedy (pdf) (210 pp, 83 MB), for residential soils, selected in 1996, included removal of arsenic-contaminated soils. This remedy also called for the cleanup of future residential soils through institutional controls. The remedy for commercial/industrial areas and the active railroad area included placement of engineered covers. Construction activities were completed in 2010. 
The 2013 modification to the Community Soils remedy (pdf) (45 pp, 2.4 MB) included cleanup of lead-contaminated residential soil, expanding the institutional controls program and development of an interior dust abatement program. Implementation of this remedy began in 2015 and is ongoing.
In May 2017, EPA signed an Explanation of Significant Differences (pdf) (7 pp, 3.8 MB) that addressed primary sources of interior dust contamination through sampling and cleanup. It also called for removal of arsenic-contaminated soils in gardens to a maximum depth of 24 inches and 12 inches for other areas of a residential yard.
In 2020, EPA signed an Explanation of Significant Differences (pdf) (11pp, 540 KB) to expand the attic dust cleanup and provide for contingency IC program if the primary ICs were to fail.
OU16 construction activities are anticipated to be completed by 2025. 
OU4, Anaconda Regional Water, Waste and Soil: The remedy (pdf) (825 pp, 175 MB), selected in 1998 and modified in 2011 (pdf) (251 pp, 4.7 MB), included consolidation of miscellaneous waste materials, placement of engineered covers over waste management areas, treatment of contaminated soils, storm water controls and institutional controls, including the monitoring and regulation of domestic wells in groundwater areas. A Technical Impracticality Waiver for arsenic in groundwater has been applied to large areas of the site. 
In 2020, EPA amended the OU4 remedy (pdf) (122 pp, 5.24 MB) to provide additional actions to reduce surface water impacts and provide for contingency waivers of certain Montana water quality standards if certain conditions were satisfied.
OU4 consists of 15 subareas. Remedial action is ongoing at most of the subareas. Over 15,000 acres have been remediated to date. Construction activities are anticipated to be complete by 2026. 
Sitewide Consent Decree Filed 
​The United States District Court in Butte entered the Consent Decree for the Anaconda Smelter National Priorities List (NPL) Site on December 16, 2022. This Consent Decree had been lodged with the Court on September 30, 2022. Under this settlement, Atlantic Richfield (AR) will finish remediating residential yards in the towns of Anaconda and Opportunity, clean up soils in upland areas above Anaconda, and eventually effect the closure of remaining slag piles at the Site. AR estimates the cost of its remaining Site work, including operation and maintenance activities intended to protect remediated lands over the long term, at $83.1 million.  ​On December 19, 2022, the EPA also finalized an amendment to the 1994 prospective purchaser agreement with the State of Montana (through the Department of Environmental Quality), and with Anaconda-Deer Lodge County and the Old Works Golf Course Authority Inc., as purchasers. The agreement provides liability protection to the purchasers in exchange for implementing certain work in support of the Anaconda Smelter National Priorities List Site, at Anaconda, Deer Lodge County, Montana. 
The Consent Decree and supporting documents can be found at Sitewide Consent Decree Documents under "Site Documents & Data."
Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Sampling of residential properties for lead is ongoing. Yards previously tested and/or cleaned up for arsenic will also be evaluated for lead contamination. Interior and attic dust and the condition of exterior lead paint will also be evaluated during sampling. Attic dust sampling is conducted by ADLC upon request of landowner. The last call for residential and commercial/industrial soil sampling is August 1, 2024, excepting at request of new owners or change in lead-sensitive populations (e.g. children) residing at property. Sampling of school properties and parks will be conducted in 2018. Domestic wells will continue to be monitored and provided treatment if necessary. Ground and surface water is routinely monitored to ensure water quality standards are met. Vegetative covers are monitored to ensure protectiveness of wildlife habitat. Top of Page