Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
​​The Anaconda Aluminum Co Columbia Falls Reduction Plant, also known as Columbia Falls Aluminum Company (CFAC) Plant, is located two miles northeast of Columbia Falls in Flathead County, Montana. It covers approximately 960 acres north of the Flathead River, a fishery that includes the federally designated, threatened bull trout and the federally sensitive westslope cutthroat trout. EPA’s initial site evaluation indicates that groundwater and surface water at the site contain various contaminants of concern, including cyanide, fluoride and various metals.  ​The CFAC plant operated between 1955 and 2009 and created significant quantities of spent potliner material, a federally listed hazardous waste, as a byproduct of the aluminum smelting process. Spent potliner material is known to contain cyanide compounds that can leach into groundwater.  ​In 1985, CFAC bought the plant from Atlantic Richfield Company, which had acquired the facility from the plant’s original owner, Anaconda Company, in 1977.​  Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
A preliminary assessment of the site was performed on March 5, 1984, by the Montana Department of Health and Sciences. The preliminary assessment concluded that hazardous wastes generated onsite were spent halogenated and non-halogenated solvents. Solid wastes included spent potliners, basement sweepings and air-pollution-control dusts.  ​A site investigation by Ecology and Environment, Inc. was conducted in 1988 at the request of EPA. The results of the site investigation indicated that high concentrations of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons occurred primarily in soils and sediments and that a release to groundwater and surface water of cyanide had occurred—both of which were attributable to plant processes.  ​On March 26, 2015, EPA proposed adding the Site to the National Priorities List. After considering all public comments on the proposal, EPA placed the Site on the National Priority List September 9, 2016. View the official listing and support document here:  
NPL Site Narrative at Listing (pdf) (1 pp, 39 K, About PDF)
Support Document (pdf) (617 pp, 22 MB) 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
​​On November 30, 2015, EPA and Columbia Falls Aluminum Company, LLC (CFAC LLC), the potentially responsible party, signed an Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent (pdf) (36 pp; 2.4 MB, About PDF) to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to investigate the site for contamination and look at options for cleanup. The RI/FS work plan (pdf) (511 pp, 158 MB) is available in the Publicly Available Documents collection.  ​Under the terms of the agreement, CFAC LLC conducted a comprehensive investigation of soils, river sediments, and ground and surface water to determine the nature and extent of contamination at the site under EPA oversight. The results of the investigation are helping to determine cleanup needs and identify potential cleanup options at the site. 
Remedial Investigation Report February 2020 (pdf) (258 MB, 329 pp, About PDF)  
In June 2021, CFAC LLC finalized the feasibility study under EPA oversight. The feasibility study considers what remedial actions may be effective based on the information gathered in the remedial investigation.  
Feasibility Study Report June 2021 (pdf) (37 MB, 538 pp)  
A removal action was conducted at the site to return the flow of the Flathead River to its northern channel. In July 2020, EPA entered into an Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent (ASAOC) with CFAC LLC to remove sediments from the South Percolation Ponds. The area had been fully characterized and the natural movement of the Flathead River threatened flooding of the area, therefore CFAC LLC wanted to address the condition quickly. This preemptive removal action prevented the potential for future erosion of the ponds and eliminated the risk for impacted sediment to reach the river. Work began in October 2020 and was completed in May 2021.  EPA released the Columbia Falls Aluminum Company Superfund Site Proposed Cleanup Plan(pdf) (35 pp, 7 MB, About PDF) on June 1, 2023. The 90-day public comment period for the Proposed Plan concluded on August 31, 2023.  ​Next steps:  
​The EPA reviewed and summarized all comments and responded to each issue in a written Responsiveness Summary. (Included with the Record of Decision) 
​The EPA reviewed the Proposed Plan, considering any new information or points of view expressed during the public comment period. 
​The EPA documented the remedy selection decision in a Record of Decision (ROD). 
​EPA and MDEQ released the Columbia Falls Aluminum Company Superfund Site Record of Decision (11 MB, 432 pp)  January 10, 2025.   The Selected Remedy detailed in the ROD consolidates and encapsulates contaminant sources to prevent exposure to humans, wildlife and the surrounding environment; reduce movement of contaminants to site groundwater; and bring levels of contaminants in seeps near the Flathead River into compliance with ecological standards. ​Key components of the remedy include:  
​Slurry Walls: Designed to isolate waste and prevent contaminant migration. 
​Improved Waste Covers: Reduce exposure and infiltration. 
​On-Site Landfill: Safely encapsulate contaminants without off-site disposal. 
​Long-Term Monitoring: Ensure the effectiveness of the remedy over time.  
​The ROD is step five in the nine-step Superfund process, with ongoing community involvement throughout. During the entire nine-step process, the EPA will continue engaging in dialogue and collaboration with community members, and we encourage the community to raise questions, provide input, and play an active role in providing feedback.     ​Next steps: 
Consent Decree negotiations with the Potentially Responsible Parties to implement the selected remedy at the Site. The public has an opportunity to comment on the future CD before it is executed by a court. 
​Remedial design and remedial action. The goal of Remedial Design is to develop the technical specifications for the selected remedy to meet the requirements of the ROD and ensure that the implementation of the remedy is effective and protective. Remedial Action will signal the start of the cleanup process.  
​Following remedial design, remedial action will start the cleanup process, and construction is estimated to last roughly two years. The EPA will conduct community engagement throughout these steps, so we can continue to inform community members and stakeholders of Site progress and expectations of next steps and be responsive to questions and concerns. 
​Learn more about the Record of Decision by viewing the Administrative Record. ​Updates will be posted on this website as they are made available. Top of Page