Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 37-acre Aberdeen Pesticide Dumps Superfund site is located in Moore County, North Carolina. It includes five separate areas impacted by industrial formulation and blending of pesticides and related waste disposal practices - a pesticide formulation plant operated (the Farm Chemicals Area) and four areas where disposal of wastes from the manufacturing process occurred. From 1930 until 1987, a pesticide formulation plant operated at the site. The PRPs demolished the facility in 1997 as part of the Site cleanup. In 2004, part of the site was redeveloped as a commercial mini-storage warehouse facility. An industrial and construction supply store and a coffee roaster also operate on the site. The EPA placed the site on the Superfund National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989 because of contaminated debris, groundwater, soil, sediment and surface water resulting from facility operations. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working nearby. By treating and monitoring groundwater, placing institutional controls on the site property and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, EPA, North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (NCDENR)Exit and the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. NCDENR is now called North Carolina Department of Environment Quality (NCDEQ). Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Bayer Corp., E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Co., Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical Corp., Syngenta (formerly known as Ciba Geigy Corp. and then Novartis Crop Protection Inc.), Olin Corp., Shell Oil Co. and Union Carbide Corp., the site’s PRPs, lead and finance site investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by the EPA and NCDENR. To improve management of cleanup activities, the EPA sometimes divides a site into Operable Units and Disposal Areas. 
Farm Chemicals Area (FC Area)
Twin Sites Area (TS Area) 22-acre - The TS Area includes three sub-areas, Disposal Areas A, B and C.
Fairway Six Area (F6 Area)
McIver Dump Area (MC Area)
Route 211 Area (R211 Area) 
EPA divided the site into four ongoing operable units (OUs): 
OU1 and OU4 address soil at all five areas (OU2 was renamed as OU4)
OU3 addresses groundwater at the TS, F6 and FC Areas
OU5 addresses groundwater at the R211 Area, and groundwater, surface water and sediment at the MD Area. 
Wastes from the formulation operations at the FC Area were disposed of at the TS Area and the F6 Area. The F6 Area was part of the Link Golf Course, however, this golf course recently closed. The F6 Area is currently a vacant field. The 1,300 square foot R211 Area was originally a borrow pit from a previous sand mining operation and later used for the disposal of pesticide-manufacturing-related waste. The owner currently uses the R211 Area for storage of personal mechanical equipment and tools. Fencing and a locked gate control access to the R211 Area. The one-acre MD Area consists of two sub-areas: Area B and Area C. A small stream, Patterson Branch, borders the MD Area to the north. A small community of single-family homes is located uphill from the MD Area. 
When
What﻿
1950s
Operations at the FC Area disposed of materials containing pesticides and pesticide residues in Area B. Site investigations also discovered pesticide materials at Area C. Fencing and locked gates control access to the MD Area. The MD Area is currently not used for any purpose.
1980s
Between 1985 and 1989, the EPA conducted cleanup activities at four of the site areas. The EPA removed contaminated soil and either stockpiled at the F6 Area or took it off site for disposal.
1990s
In 1996, the Site’s PRPs demolished 12 buildings at the Farm Chemicals Area. The PRPs used low-level heat to drive contamination from over 123,000 tons of contaminated soil from 1997 to 1998. The PRPs completed cleanup construction at the R211 and MD Areas in 1997 and 2000, respectively. The EPA and the PRPs finalized the groundwater cleanup plan design for the FC, TS and F6 areas in 1998.
2003
The EPA issued the site’s Preliminary Close-Out Report, documenting the completion of all remedy construction activities. The PRPs placed institutional controls on the Farm Chemicals Area to restrict land uses.
2004
Sampling of sediment, surface water and fish tissue from Page’s Lake in 2004 confirmed that site-related contaminant levels in the lake did not pose a threat to people.
2008
Prior to 2008, the PRPs conducted groundwater sampling at the FC, TS and F6 areas on an annual basis. Since 2008, the PRPs sample and analyze groundwater at the F6 Area every five years as part of the Five-Year Review process. The PRPs sample and analyze groundwater at the FC and TS areas every other year.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published by EPA HQs in 2023. Currently the Aberdeen Pesticide Dump Site is protective of human health and the environment in the short-term. The PRPs continue to conduct groundwater cleanup and monitoring activities. The PRPs continue to extract and treat contaminated ground water at the R211 Area and discharge the treated water back into the aquifer. Groundwater monitoring at all five areas is on-going. The remedy currently protects human health and the environment because no human or ecological exposure pathways exist to contaminated soil or groundwater. However, in order for the remedy to be protective in the long-term, the following action needs to be taken: complete a thorough review of the contaminants of concern (COCs) for OU-3 and OU-5 and remediation levels and issue an BSD (per OU), if necessary, to amend the COCs and remediation levels to maintain protectiveness of human health and the environment. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The PRPs placed institutional controls on the Farm Chemicals Area to restrict land uses. The Site’s first Five-Year Review, completed in 2008, recommended development of a plan describing the approach for placing restrictive covenants, well drilling ordinances and institutional controls on properties affected by Site contamination to prevent the installation of drinking water wells. Fencing and locked gates control access to the 1-acre MD Area. The MD Area is not currently in use. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA negotiated legal agreements with the Site’s PRPs to investigate and clean up the site. The PRPs continue to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities.
Top of Page