Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 12-acre FCX, Inc., (Washington Plant) Superfund Site is located in northwest Washington, North Carolina. Grimes Road and Whispering Pines Road border the Site to the northeast. Wetlands, Kennedy Creek and the Tar River border the Site to the south and southwest. Agricultural land borders the Site to the west and northwest. The Site’s broader surroundings include commercial, industrial and residential land uses. From 1945 to 1985, the Farmer’s Cooperative Exchange (FCX) operated a farm supply distribution center at the Site. Operations at the distributions center packaged and sold pesticides, herbicides and tobacco-treating chemicals.  Beginning in the early 1970s, operations disposed of pesticide wastes and other agricultural chemicals in a large trench on Site. Farmer’s Cooperative Exchange filed for bankruptcy in 1985. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the Site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989 because of contaminated groundwater, surface water and soil resulting from waste handling practices. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the Site. The EPA and the North Carolina Department of Environment Quality (NC DEQ) have investigated site conditions. By monitoring groundwater and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, the EPA and NCDEQ continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The EPA leads site investigation and cleanup activities in cooperation with NC DEQ. Site investigations and cleanup activities have focused on two areas, which the EPA refers to as operable units (OUs). These areas include:
OU-1: contaminated groundwater
OU-2: contaminated soil
1986 Local, state and federal agencies along with owners, FCX, Inc. and Fred Webb, Inc., initiated site investigations. Groundwater and soil were found to be contaminated with pesticides, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semi-VOCs (SVOCs) and metals. 1988 The Site was proposed for inclusion on the the EPA's National Priorities List (NPL) on June 24, 1988. 1989﻿ The EPA and the State of North Carolina joined in legal action to secure the remaining assets of FCX, Inc., which had filed for bankruptcy, prior to their disbursement to the company's investors. The Site was finalized on the NPL on March 31,1989. OU-2: the EPA initiates removal actions for potential source areas and associated contamination. 1990-1992 The EPA initiated the Site's remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to address all potential source areas and associated contamination. OU-1: The EPA conducted groundwater analyses and found elevated concentrations of pesticides, VOCs, SVOCs and metals. OU-2: Contaminated soil from the main chemical burial trench and the area surrounding the former FCX blending building were excavated, consolidated and stockpiled by the EPA. Three out of 4 phased removal actions were completed. 1993 A 1993 baseline risk assessment (BRA) used sampling data collected during the RI to identify contaminants of concern (COCs), complete a toxicity assessment, a human exposure assessment, a risk characterization and an environmental assessment. OU-1: the EPA selects groundwater remedy in the 1993 Record of Decision (ROD). The remedy selected included:
Extraction of groundwater contaminated above the Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) or the North Carolina Groundwater Standards, whichever is more protective.
On-site treatment of extracted groundwater via air stripping, carbon adsorption, precipitation and ion exchange.
Discharge of treated ground water to surface water.
1996 OU-2: the EPA completes the fourth and final removal action for soil. The EPA selects no further action in the 1996 ROD as no unacceptable risk was determined following removal actions. 1997-2003 OU-1: the EPA conducts Remedial Design (RD) Phase for the groundwater selected remedy. Reviewal of groundwater sampling data resulted in the EPA evaluating Monitored Natural Attenuation (MNA) as potential alternative remedy. 2005 OU-1: the EPA updated the long-term remedy for OU-1 in an amended Record of Decision (AROD), changing cleanup activities for contaminated groundwater to MNA. 2010 The North Carolina Department of Transportation constructs the U.S. Route 17 Washington Bypass on a portion of the site. Additionally, the department is making improvements to U.S. Route 17, which includes four areas on site. Currently, the highway bypass runs from the site’s southwest boundary to its northeast boundary. The EPA conducts the first Five-year review of the site. The EPA concludes that the remedy protects human health and the environment in the short-term because groundwater is not being used as a ground water source on site or offsite and removal actions were completed to excavate source contamination. 2013 Park Boat Company acquires Parcels located on Site for commercial use. OU-2: the EPA conducts a soil review of FCX Soil Samples. 2015 The EPA conducts the second Five-Year Review for the Site. The EPA determines that the remedies are protective to human health and the environment since there are no current exposure routes to contaminated soil or groundwater. 2019﻿ OU-1: the EPA continues to sample groundwater to insure MNA is still a effective remedy. 2020﻿ The EPA conducts the second Five-Year Review for the Site. The EPA determines that the remedies are protective to human health and the environment since there are no current exposure routes to contaminated soil or groundwater. 2024 OU-1: the EPA transferred the groundwater MNA remedy over to NC DEQ. NC DEQ is now responsible for biennial groundwater sampling to monitor the selected remedy.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The EPA is currently conducting the fourth Five-year review for the Site to ensure that the remedies are still protective of human health and the environment. As part of the Five-year review, EPA conducted a Site inspection on December 16, 2024. Further review of confirmation data from soil samples is needed to determine if instituitonal controls (ICs) are warranted for parcels located onsite.

Sampling and Monitoring
NC DEQ continues to monitor groundwater and evaluate the effectiveness of monitored natural attenuation at the Site.

Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
In 1992, a Trust Agreement provided FCX bankruptcy proceeding assets to fund cleanup activities at the site and the FCX-Statesville Superfund site. The EPA is also using federal funds for Site cleanup activities.
