DAVIS PARK ROAD TCEGASTONIA, NC
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 20-acre Davis Park Road TCE Superfund site is located south of Hudson Boulevard and north of Blackwood Creek in Gastonia, North Carolina, a suburb of Charlotte. Residential areas, which include low-income residents, and commercial businesses surround the site. The site also includes an auto service shop. In 1990, the Gaston County Environmental Health Department performed routine water sampling in a residential subdivision. The samples contained high levels of contamination. Site investigations in the early 1990s identified wastes discharged by an auto repair shop as the source of the groundwater contamination. The site includes an area of soil behind a building located at 2307 Davis Park Road and an area of contaminated ground water that spreads outward from this property and extends south along Davis Park Road to Blackwood Creek. After identifying contaminated soil during an initial assessment, investigators did not detect any contaminated soil during a more extensive follow-up investigation. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1999 because of contaminated groundwater. EPA and the North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and Environment (NCDENR) have investigated site conditions and taken steps to clean up the site in order to protect people and the environment from contamination. In 2000, EPA connected most residences overlying affected groundwater to the public water system or installed filter systems. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working on or near the site. By monitoring groundwater contamination and conducting required Five-Year Reviews, EPA and NCDENR continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA leads site investigation and cleanup activities in cooperation with NCDENR. 1998
The site’s Record of Decision, or ROD (the long-term remedy) included
connecting homes, churches and businesses in the site area to the Gastonia public water supply
placing wellhead treatment systems on affected private wells, as an alternative to connecting them to the public water supply
using natural attenuation to restore contaminated groundwater
monitoring groundwater
developing alternative plans to use a pump-and-treat system to address groundwater contamination in case natural attenuation did not work as anticipated
EPA also physically abandoned 19 private wells, plugging the wells with a cement grout 2000
EPA began on-site cleanup activities, connecting 63 residences to the public water system. EPA also installed carbon filters at five residences where the homeowners chose not to connect to the public water system. Two residents with private wells in the affected area chose not to connect to the public water system or use a carbon filter. EPA updated the long-term remedy in 2000 to clarify that EPA would not need to use the alternative pump-and-treat cleanup approach to address groundwater contamination and to extend the projected cleanup time needed for groundwater to meet site cleanup goals. 2010
EPA has conducted several Five-Year Reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews make sure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The 2010 FYR review, concluded that there was a need for additional work before determining the protectiveness of the site’s cleanup approach. EPA took follow-up actions in response to the Five-Year Review recommendations. 2012
NCDENR began leading site cleanup activities in 2012. 2015
No issues of protectiveness were raised in the 2015 FYR. The State continues to conduct Operation & Maintenance activities at the site, and the groundwater contamination continues to attenuate. 
What Is the Current Site Status?
The forth Five Year Review was published by EPA HQs in 2020. Currently the remedy at the Site is protective of human health and the environment.
EPA and NCDENR will continue to monitor the natural attenuation of ground water contaminants.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The Davis Park Road TCE Site is in continued use. Residential and light industrial land uses are located on site. The site includes residential homes and an auto service shop.  EPA began on-site cleanup activities, connecting 63 residences to the public water system. EPA also installed carbon filters at five residences where the homeowners chose not to connect to the public water system. Two residents with private wells in the affected area chose not to connect to the public water system or use a carbon filter.
Sampling and Monitoring
EPA and NCDENR will continue to monitor the natural attenuation of ground water contaminants.

Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA was unable to identify any viable potentially responsible parties for the site. The EPA is using federal funds for site cleanup activities.
