REASOR CHEMICAL COMPANYCASTLE HAYNE, NC 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Reasor Chemical Company site is located in Castle Hayne, New Hanover County, North Carolina. Castle Hayne is approximately 13 miles north of Wilmington. The site is an abandoned stump rendering facility, which operated from 1959 to 1972 under the name of Reasor Chemical Company. The site property consists of one parcel of 25.59 acres. A fire and possible explosion occurred on the property on April 7, 1972, which damaged and destroyed the remaining buildings and material on the site property. The property is currently vacant, overgrown with native brush and secondary growth forest, and has unpaved roads running throughout. According to EPA records, the Reasor Chemical Company produced turpentine, pine resin, pitch, tall oil, pine oil, camphor, pine tar, and charcoal from pine tree stumps. It is believed that the facility used various solvents to extract raw product from chipped stumps, distilling the extract into separate product fractions. The solvents used in the extraction process were likely stored on-site in 55-gallon drums, the remains of which were in a surface drum disposal area near the center of the property. The EPA concluded that four of the five ponds on-site were used in the manufacturing process. Those four ponds contained sediments with elevated concentrations of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and inorganic compounds. EPA also concluded that an area thought to have been used to store scrap copper was also present, which had elevated concentrations of copper and lead. Contamination was discovered in 1989 during a Preliminary Environmental / Liability Assessment that was conducted for a prospective purchaser of the property. Additional site historical detail can be reviewed in the Amended ROD dated June 1, 2007, and the Interim Remedial Action and Final Remediation Report, Revision 3, prepared by Apex Companies, LLC (Apex) dated June 24, 2008. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site’s Potentially Responsible Parties (PRPs) performed cleanup activities with oversight provided by EPA and the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (now known as North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality or NCDEQ). In 2008, contaminated soil, sediment and surface water were removed to residential and ecological cleanup goals. A "Declaration of Perpetual Land Use Restriction" was attached to the property deed to prohibit installation of wells on the property. In 2017, groundwater cleanup goals were met and the second Five-Year Review was completed. On July 31, 2018, EPA published in the ﻿Federal Register a notice to delete the site from the National Priorities List (NPL). On September 25, 2018, EPA published the Federal Register notice announcing deletion of the site from the NPL. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
All cleanup goals have been achieved and the remedy is protective of human health and the environment. EPA removed the site from the National Priorities List (NPL) on September 25, 2018. 
Top of Page