WAVERLY GROUND WATER CONTAMINATIONWAVERLY, NE 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Waverly Groundwater Contamination Site extends over an 11-acre area underlying the city of Waverly, Nebraska. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) operated a federal grain facility in Waverly from 1952 to 1974. A grain fumigant consisting of carbon tetrachloride and carbon disulfide was used at the facility from 1955 to 1965. Since 1975, the property has been owned by Lancaster County, which operates a district office and maintenance facility on the premises. The EPA and the state of Nebraska sampled municipal wells in 1982 and found them to be contaminated with carbon tetrachloride. One well was taken out of service, two wells were placed on standby status, and the city of Waverly drilled new wells to replace them. The area surrounding the site is predominantly agricultural. The population of Waverly is approximately 1,900 people. The site was listed on the National Priority List in June 1986. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The cleanup levels for groundwater and soils, as described in the Record of Decision, have been achieved. The EPA deleted the site from the NPL in November, 2006.   Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Groundwater monitoring has continued on a quarterly basis since November 2006 to ensure the contaminant levels continue to decline. The analytical results provided in the Quarterly Report for the Waverly, Nebraska, Expedited Response Action, 1st Quarter FY 2009, Reporting Period October 2008 through December 2008 indicated the contaminant levels in all sampled monitoring wells were below the cleanup levels established in the Record of Decision. The data collected from these sampling activities were used in the fourth and final Five-Year Review, which was completed in August 2009.  The conclusion of the review indicated that the completed remedial action remain protective of human health and the environment and allows for unrestricted reuse of the site. Top of Page