BRUNO CO-OP ASSOCIATION/ASSOCIATED PROPERTIESBRUNO, NE
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Bruno Co-op Association/Associated Properties site, is located in the small rural community of Bruno, Nebraska. The U.S. Department of Agriculture formerly operated the site as a grain storage facility. In 1984, the Nebraska Department of Health (NDOH), determined the public water supply for Bruno was contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), specifically constituents of grain fumigants. Fumigants were applied in unapproved ways at the site, such as pouring directly down rodent holes to control pests. These activities resulted in groundwater at the site becoming contaminated with carbon tetrachloride, chloroform and 1,2-dichloroethane at concentrations that exceed the maximum contaminant level for each compound.  At the time groundwater contamination was first detected, groundwater was the sole source of drinking water for the community of Bruno, collected via two public water supply wells installed in the local aquifer system. In 1989, the EPA provided bottled water to residents. In 1990, the potentially responsible parties, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Union Pacific Railroad and Bruno Co-op, installed two new public water supply wells upgradient of the contaminated groundwater plume. The site was added to the National Priorities List in 1996. In October 2006, the village of Bruno was connected to the David City public water supply, located approximately ten miles west of Bruno, via a pipeline. In 2006, an investigation was completed to assess the potential for vapor intrusion of site- related contaminants into occupied structures.
What Is the Current Site Status?
T﻿he site is currently operated as a commercial grain storage operation. Residents have been supplied with a permanent source of clean drinking water and the contaminated groundwater is being remediated by a pump and treat system that became operational in 2004. The remediation system includes four groundwater extraction wells, treatment of contaminated water via conventional air stripping methods and discharge of treated groundwater to a nearby tributary of Skull Creek. Currently two of the four groundwater extraction wells are operating full-time with a third operational for four consecutive weeks each year, as approved by the EPA and the Nebraska Department of Energy and Environment. The two operational wells produce an average combined flow rate of 95 gallons per minute. The historically impacted water supply wells have been abandoned or are no longer in use. Institutional controls are in place to prohibit the construction of new private water wells in the contaminated plume area. The PRPs are performing routine groundwater sampling and operation and maintenance activities for the pump and treat system. The remediation time frame is estimated to occur over a 20-year time period.
