Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Omaha Lead Superfund Site is comprised of residential properties, child-care centers and other residential-type properties in the city of Omaha, Nebraska, where the surface soil is contaminated as a result of deposition of air emissions from historic lead smelting and refining operations. The site boundary encompasses 27 square miles and is centered around downtown Omaha, where two former lead-processing facilities operated. The American Smelting and Refining Company, Inc., (ASARCO) operated a lead refinery at 500 Douglas Street for over 125 years. Aaron Ferer & Sons Company, and later the Gould Electronics, Inc., operated a lead battery recycling plant located at 555 Farnam Street for many years. Both the ASARCO and Aaron Ferer/Gould facilities released lead-containing particulates to the atmosphere from their smokestacks. The lead particles were transported through the air and deposited on surrounding residential properties. It is important to note that although the site boundary encompasses more than 40,000 properties, only the properties where the surface soil is contaminated with lead at a concentration that exceeds the health-based limit are included in the site. The health-based limit for lead in surface soil at residential locations is 400 parts per million (ppm). Residential properties where soil sampling indicates that soil lead concentrations are below 400 ppm are not considered part of the site. Commercial and industrial properties are also excluded from the site. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The EPA remediated more than 13,000 residential properties at the site between 1999 and 2015 in accordance with the Record of Decision. The EPA is also providing funding to the city of Omaha and the Douglas County Health Department to continue efforts to obtain voluntary access to properties where the owner did not grant access to the EPA. The testing of soil, exterior lead-based paint, and interior dust are conducted at no cost to the property owner. If the soil needs to be cleaned up, the cleanup is conducted at no cost to the property owner. The cleanup action specified in the ROD includes excavation of soil exhibiting lead concentrations greater than 400 ppm, replacement of contaminated soil with clean backfill, placement of sod, stabilization of lead-based paint to protect the remediated soil, testing of indoor dust and public education and outreach to assist the public in recognizing other potential sources of lead contamination.  
1998
The Omaha City Council sent a letter to EPA requesting assistance to address the high incidence of elevated blood lead levels found in children. The Omaha City Council sent a letter to EPA requesting assistance to address the high incidence of elevated blood lead levels found in children.
March 1999
EPA began collecting soil from residential properties being used as child-care facilities.
August 1999
EPA entered into several interagency agreements with the US Army Corps of Engineers to conduct Time Critical Removal Actions at more than 250 properties. The EPA also issued a Unilateral Order to ASARCO.
April 2003
Omaha Lead Superfund Site listed on the National Priority List (NPL).
December 2004
EPA issued an Interim Record of Decision.
May 2009
EPA issued the Final Record of Decision.
June 2009
Settlement of the court case with ASARCO for more than $200 million﻿.
December 2015
EPA completed the cleanup of 13,090 residential propertie﻿s.
Ongoing
The city of Omaha and Douglas County Health Department continue efforts to address lead contamination issues at the remaining properties where the owner was not willing to grant access to collect soil samples or clean up lead contaminated soil﻿.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
In December 2015, the EPA completed the EPA-lead action at the site. Between 1998 and December 2015, the EPA collected soil samples from 42,047 residential properties. The results of the soil sampling indicated that 14,019 properties qualified for soil clean up. As of December 31, 2015, the EPA completed cleanup activities at 13,090 (93%) of the properties. The EPA was not able to obtain access to the remaining properties. In addition to soil sampling and cleanup activities, t﻿he EPA evaluated 12,057 properties for the presence of exterior lead-based paint. Of the 6,782 residences that qualified, the EPA completed exterior lead-based paint stabilizations on 6,249 (92%) residences. The EPA also collected dust samples from the interior of 4,861 residences to test for lead in the dust. Work with the city of Omaha: Because there were about 1,000 properties where the EPA was not able to obtain voluntary access from the property owner, the EPA met with the representatives from the city of Omaha to discuss options for completing the work. The city of Omaha requested to be allowed to continue with attempts to obtain access voluntarily. In 2015, the EPA entered into a cooperative agreement with the city of Omaha to conduct the work at the remaining properties. The agreement and a subsequent amendment provides the city with $42 million to continue work to collect soil samples, conduct soil clean up activities, and perform exterior lead-based paint stabilizations. The cooperative agreement also continues to fund the city’s development of a publicly available database that allows the community to determine the status of the residential properties within the site. The database can be found at http://www.omahalead.org. The EPA does not have the regulatory authority under the Superfund law (CERCLA) to address all of the possible sources of lead that occur in communities. For example, the EPA does not have authority to address soil contamination from emissions of lead containing gasoline, indoor lead-based paint, or lead pipes. Yet exposure to lead from these sources can contribute to elevated blood-lead levels in children. Therefore, the cooperative agreement provides the city with funding to conduct lead education and outreach activities to inform the public about all possible sources of lead. The city of Omaha has obtained access to several residential properties and began cleaning up additional residential properties in September 2017. As of January 2025, the city of Omaha has completed soil remediation activities at 655 properties and only 145 properties remain that have not yet been sampled. Work with the Douglas County Health Department: The EPA has a cooperative agreement with the Douglas County Health Department (DCHD) that provides funding for compiling childhood blood lead data to allow the EPA to evaluate the effectiveness of the cleanup work at the site. The DCHD also collects interior dust samples from residences and provides high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) vacuum cleaners to eligible residences to address historic releases to home interiors. As of December 2025, 7,244 properties have had dust inspections conducted at the residence between the EPA and the DCHD efforts. Additionally, the DCHD conducts education and outreach to homeowners and health care providers to increase awareness of the health effects of lead. ﻿Trends in blood lead levels in children: DCHD collects childhood blood lead data, compiles the data, and provides summary information to the EPA's Superfund program. ﻿Data provided to the EPA indicated that in the 1990's more than 36% of the children in Douglas County between the age of 0-72 months had blood lead levels greater than the level of concern of 10 micrograms per deciliter (µg/dL). In one specific zip code, as many as 42% of the children exhibited blood lead levels greater than 10 µg/dL. In 2012, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) adopted the Advisory Committee on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention (ACCLPP) recommendations to eliminate the term “level of concern” and use a blood lead "reference value" that is based on the 97.5th percentile of the National Health & Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) blood lead distributions in children from one to five years of age (CDC 2012). Using the 2007–2010 NHANES, the blood lead reference value associated with the 97.5th percentile is 5 µg/dL (CDC 2012). Since 2015, less than 2% of children 7 years and younger within the site have had blood lead levels greater than 5 µg/dL. Partial Deletions: As properties are cleaned up pursuant to the Record of Decision for the site and it is determined that no further response action under CERCLA is appropriate, the properties are eligible for deletion from the National Priorities List (NPL). As of 2023, the EPA deleted a total of 2,294 properties from the Omaha Lead site. These property deletions occurred in 2013, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
﻿As one of the institutional controls at the site, the EPA provides funding to the city of Omaha to continue development and maintenance of the Omaha Lead Registry, a database of properties within the boundary of the Omaha Lead Superfund site. The database provides the public with access to information about the status of individual properties. The database can be found at: http://www.omahalead.org/﻿. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Currently, the city of Omaha, under a cooperative agreement with the EPA, is attempting to gain voluntary property access to the remaining properties within the site boundary that have not been sampled. If you'd like to learn more about the status of individual properties within the site, visit the Omaha Lead Registry database. The city of Omaha also conducts inspections of properties where soil cleanup was conducted to evaluate if the remedy outlined in the Record of Decision continues to be effective. The current priority for inspections is for properties with known lead contamination left behind following completion of soil cleanup. If the property has a change in site conditions and is eligible for re-sampling of the remediated quadrants, the property owner is notified and the property will be referred for sampling. Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Site cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In 1999, the initial removal response actions consisted of excavation and replacement of soil exceeding 800 ppm lead at residential properties and exceeding 400 ppm lead at childcare centers and residences where children with elevated blood lead levels resided. In August 2002, a second removal action was initiated at all other residential-type properties where the maximum non-foundation soil lead concentration exceeded an action level of 2,500 ppm. As cleanups were completed at the most highly contaminated residential properties, the soil lead action level was sequentially reduced to 1,200 ppm and eventually 800 ppm so that soil cleanups could continue under CERCLA removal authority at the properties remaining with the highest soil lead levels. At properties determined to be eligible for response under either of the removal actions, soils exceeding the cleanup level of 400 ppm lead were excavated and replaced with clean soil and disturbed areas were revegetated.  Top of Page
Enforcement Information
In August 2005, ASARCO filed for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code in the Southern District of Texas, Corpus Christi Division. The United States filed a proof of claim in the bankruptcy action to cover all past and future costs associated with the site. The claim with ASARCO for the site was resolved by the court on July 5, 2009. As a result of the settlement, ASARCO paid $186,500,000 plus interest to the EPA. As a result of subsequent court actions, ASARCO paid an additional $16,500,000 to the EPA, for a total of $220,000,000.
Pursuant to Consent Decrees, Union Pacific Railroad Company paid $3.15 million to the Omaha Healthy Kids Alliance and $21.35 million to the EPA in August 2011. Gould Electronics Inc. paid $1.1 million to the EPA in August 2011. NL Industries paid $624,000 to the EPA in March 2012 and Aaron Ferer & Sons Company paid $480,000 to the EPA in February 2013. Top of Page