Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Ottati and Goss/Kingston Steel Drum Site is located in Kingston, New Hampshire, approximately eight miles north of Haverhill, Massachusetts, and approximately three miles south of the center of Kingston, New Hampshire.  The Site is comprised of three distinct sections.  The first is a 5.88 acre parcel referred to as the Great Lakes Container Corporation and Kingston Steel Drum (GLCC/KSD) area.  The second area is 29 acres and is owned by the Senter Transportation Company and Concord Realty Trust.  One acre of this parcel was leased to Ottati and Goss, Inc. (O&G), and now this entire 29-acre parcel is referred to as the O&G portion of the Site.  The third section is a 23-acre marsh located east of the GLCC/KSD section, located between Route 125 and Country Pond.  This parcel was purchased by the IMCERA Group Inc., in 1984 and the section is referred to as Country Pond Marsh.  From the late 1950's through 1967 the Conway Barrel and Drum Company (CDB) owned the Site and performed drum reconditioning operations in the GLCC/KSD portion of the Site.  The reconditioning operations included caustic rinsing of drums and disposal of the rinse water in a dry well near South Brook.  As a result of South Brook and Country Pond pollution, CDB established two leaching pits (lagoons) in areas removed from South Brook.  Kingston Steel Drum, the operator of the facility from 1967 to 1973, continued the same operations as CDB.  In 1973 International Minerals and Chemicals Corporation (IMC) purchased the drum and reconditioning plant and operated it until 1976.  The lagoons were reported to be filled in 1973 and 1974.  The property was purchased in 1976 by the Great Lakes Container Corporation.  Beginning in 1978, the Ottati and Goss Company operations consisted of “processed hazardous materials brought to the Site in drums.”  Heavy sludge from the wash tank and from draining, and residues from incinerator operations at GLCC, were transported to the O&G portion of the site for processing.  The O&G operations ceased in 1979.  GLCC continued the drum reconditioning operation on its portion of the Site, until July 1980. Soil throughout the Site was contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), acid/base/neutral compounds (ABNs), metals and cyanide at high concentrations at numerous locations.  Surface water in North and South Brooks and Country Pond contained dissolved VOCs.  Sediments in North and South Brooks and the marsh contained VOCs and PCBs.  Groundwater contaminated with VOCs, arsenic, nickel, iron and manganese was evident in several plumes.  The plumes appeared to merge into one plume which migrated under Route 125 and the Country Pond Marsh, eventually discharging into Country Pond. The Site was placed on EPA’s National Priorities List on September 8, 1983. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Beginning in 1980, a number of investigations and remedial activities have been conducted at the Site.  From December 1980 to July 1982, EPA conducted emergency removal actions and processed and removed over 4,000 drums from the O&G portion of the Site.  The site was added to the NPL in September 1983.  On the GLCC/KSD portion of the Site, IMC removed drums and soil between July 1984 and June 1985.  The total removal included: 12,800 tons of soil, drums, and metals; 101,700 tons of flammable sludge and 6,000 gallons of flammable liquid.  The Remedial Investigations and Feasibility Study were completed in 1986.  EPA’s Record of Decision (ROD) for the site was signed on January 16, 1987.  The ROD specified remedial activities to be implemented at the Site to mitigate contaminated soil, sediment, and groundwater.  During 1988, several PRPs entered into a Consent Decree with EPA addressing the cleanup of soil on the O&G portion of the Site and groundwater remediation for the entire site. The 1988 Consent decree defined the O&G soil cleanup as operable unit one (OU1) and the groundwater remediation as OU2.  Following a second Consent Decree in 1993 involving EPA, NHDES, and the remaining PRPs, two additional operable units, OU3 and OU4, were defined to complete the remediation.  OU3 addresses the site groundwater contamination, while OU4 addresses the building demolition and the remaining soil and sediment contamination not addressed by the 1988 Consent Decree.  OU2 has been superseded by OU3.   Pursuant to the 1988 OU1 Consent Decree, three PRPs (General Electric Company, Solvents Recovery Service of New England, and Lilly Industrial Coatings, Inc.) performed response actions at the O&G portion of the site.  In 1988 and 1989 these three PRPs excavated and treated about 4,700 cubic yards of soil contaminated with VOCs to a depth down to the water table at the O&G portion of the Site.  The treatment was by thermal desorption (thermal aeration in the ROD).   OU1 was completed on August 1, 1989. OU2 has been superseded by OU3.  During September 1996, the design of the groundwater extraction and treatment system under OU3 was completed.  However, based on site information and data generated since the issuance of the 1987 ROD and after the careful study of alternative groundwater cleanup technologies, the EPA believed that in-situ (in place) chemical oxidation (ISCO) would be a better approach to cleaning the groundwater at the Site than the groundwater extraction and treatment system selected in the 1987 ROD.  In September 2007, EPA amended the 1987 ROD to change the groundwater cleanup strategy from extraction and treatment to in-situ chemical oxidation.  EPA completed the first of three ISCO injections in September 2008, the second in October 2009 and the last ISCO injections in October 2010. Phase 1 of the OU4 remedial action (building demolition) was completed in February 1994 and included the following demolition activities: 1) asbestos abatement; 2) building debris removal and disposal; 3) sampling and analysis; 4) utilities removal; 5) removal of above-ground and underground storage tanks; 6) contaminated soil and sediment disposal; and 7) installation of a high-density polyethylene cover over the southeast portion of the former building . Phase 2 of the OU4 remedial action included the soil and sediment excavation, LTTD treatment, and restoration activities.  Between August 2001 and June 2002, 72,347 tons of PCB and VOC-contaminated soil (not including oversized material > 2-inches), were excavated from the GLCC/KSD area of the Site and treated in an on-site LTTD plant.  Prior to treatment, debris (including drums, concrete, metal, wood, timbers, and tires) was removed from the soil and disposed off site. Between October 2001 and February 2002, approximately 9,143 tons of sediment from the Country Pond Marsh were excavated, transported and disposed of as non-hazardous waste at a RCRA Subtitle D disposal facility.  Approximately 492 tons of sediment were transported and disposed of as PCB hazardous waste (Toxic Substances Control Act) at a RCRA Subtitle C landfill facility.  Site restoration activities included back filling, grading, seeding, vegetative plantings, and fence installation. Remediated areas of Country Pond Marsh were reconstructed and South Brook, which had been diverted during the remediation, was restored between May 2002 and September 2002.  In June 2002, thirteen groundwater monitoring wells were installed at ten locations at the site.  Other restoration activities included removing utilities, construction of permanent access roads, installation of a new chain-link fence with gates, reseeding, and removal of the South Brook diversion swale and recharge galleries. In July 2007 the State of New Hampshire recorded a notice to the chain of title for the GLCC/KSD property to document the land activity and use restrictions (AURs) required to maintain the protectiveness of the soil remedy and to establish institutional controls over the 5.89 acres of the property.  The AURs allow for commercial or industrial uses provided soils are not disturbed at a depth greater than six feet.  Use of the property as a residence, school, nursery, recreational area or any other use at which a child’s presence is likely or intended is not permitted.  Installation of groundwater wells or any removal or exposure to groundwater (except for remediation purposes) is not permitted unless such activity is first evaluated and approved by the EPA and NHDES. In March 2012, the Town of Kingston adopted an institutional control consisting of a Town Ordinance that prohibits the use of groundwater for adjacent lots affected by the groundwater plume originating from the Site. Cleanup Progress. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The Site is currently in the long-term monitoring phase.  Reviews are performed every five years.  The last five-year review was performed in September 2024.  The next five-year review is planned for September 2029. In addition, a Remedial Investigation (RI) is being conducted to investigate the presence and extent of PFAS at the Site. The RI is anticipated to be completed by December 2025.   Cleanup Progress Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of documents, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page