Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Site is located on Tolend Road in the City of Dover in Strafford County, New Hampshire (Figure 1). The Site consists of a former municipal landfill and areas affected by the former landfill. Residences are located along Tolend Road and Glen Hill Road east of the landfill. Undeveloped woodlands and forested wetlands are north, west, and south of the landfill. The Cocheco River is about 600 feet northeast of the landfill. The Bellamy Reservoir, a drinking water supply for the City of Portsmouth and other communities, is about 1,500 feet south of the landfill. Owned and operated by the City of Dover from 1960 until its closure in 1980, the landfill accepted domestic and industrial waste. Buried materials include leather-tanning wastes, organic solvents, municipal trash, and sludge from the Dover wastewater plant. Facility operations contaminated groundwater with volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and arsenic. In 1977, the state installed monitoring wells around the area and found that organic solvents were entering the groundwater, posing a potential threat to nearby residential wells and public water supplies for Dover and Portsmouth. After initial actions to protect human health and the environment, the site’s long-term cleanup and monitoring are ongoing.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Prior to EPA including the Site in the National Priority List (NPL) on September 8, 1983, the City of Dover installed municipal water to connect residences along Tolend and Glen Hill Roads in the vicinity of the landfill.  Additional residential connections, further from the landfill, continued until 1989. These connections prevented exposure to Site contaminants in the groundwater. ﻿In 1984, the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NH DES), under a cooperative agreement with EPA, commenced a Remedial Investigation (RI) for the Site which was completed in 1988, on and a Feasibility Study (FS) in 1991. As a result of RI/FS activities, groundwater impacts were detected beneath the landfill as well as beyond the footprint of the landfill boundary. Contaminants at the Site were identified primarily in the groundwater, surface water, and sediment.  The most prevalent impacts were on the groundwater and include VOCs and arsenic. In 1991 EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) for the Site.  With this ROD, a remedy was selected, cleanup levels were established for 15 Contaminants of Concern (COCs) and Remedial Action Objectives (RAOs) were set to eliminate threats posed by direct contact with or ingestion of contaminated soil and waste material at the Site. Also, RAOs to protect the drinking water aquifer by minimizing further migration of COCs to the groundwater and surface water were set.  The ROD-selected remedy included recontouring the existing landfill surface and construction of a multi-layered cap over the landfill to prevent infiltration and promote run-off and the installation of leachate and contaminated groundwater collection system around the perimeter of the landfill, among other elements to control the source of the contamination (Source Control or SC). It also, included the use of institutional controls (ICs), where possible to prohibit the use of groundwater, the implementation of a long-term groundwater monitoring program, and the use of natural attenuation processes to attain groundwater cleanup levels in the Eastern Plume, among other elements, to manage the migration of contaminants. ﻿In 1992, EPA issued an Amended Administrative Order on Consent (AOC) in which the PRPs agreed to further characterize the horizontal and vertical extent of the Southern Plume contamination.  As part of this AOC, a Southern Plume Pre-Design Investigation (SP-PDI) was completed by the PRPs in 1994.   The SP-PDI activities served as the basis for the remedial design of the cap and upgradient groundwater diversion trench.  In 1996 a 100% remedial design was submitted by the PRPs; however, it was not approved pending consideration of a new approach to Source Control (SC) remediation, an in-situ bioremediation approach. After conducting a pilot project for this approach, in 2001 EPA concluded that the alternative approach was not better than the SC component of the ROD. As a result, the PRPs prepared a Revised Focused Feasibility Study which EPA carefully reviewed and used as a basis for amending the 1991 ROD in 2004. The 2004 Amended ROD retained all the components of the 1991 ROD but among other elements, it replaced capping the landfill and capturing leachate with a treatment trench. It also required that the PRPs perform PDIs to evaluate potential risks that had not been addressed in the 1991 ROD, including vapor intrusion and sediment eco-toxicity. The PRPs completed those PDIs in 2009 and 2008, respectively and after reviewing them, EPA concluded that the concentrations found in these two media did not pose unacceptable risks. The PDIs identified that site-specific conditions would present certain challenges to the treatment trench remedy; therefore, an ESD was issued in 2009 (2009 ESD).  The 2009 ESD changed the treatment trench selected in the 2004 AROD to a multi-level groundwater extraction within the same footprint as where the treatment trench was to be deployed.  The ESD did not modify or revise Site RAOs. Most recently, in 2022 an ESD established 1,4-dioxane as a groundwater COC, changed the groundwater cleanup level for tetrahydrofuran (THF) and clarified the terminology used for the groundwater cleanup levels. The 2022 ESD also updated the approach for evaluating attainment of the groundwater cleanup levels using a risk evaluation. Also, in 2022 EPA completed the second Five Year Review for the Site. The second Five Year Review of the Site concluded that the sitewide remedy currently protects human health and the environment because: 1) public drinking water is supplied to the entire area surrounding the Site; 2) contamination was not detected in the Bellamy Reservoir intake water samples; 3) the landfill cover prevents physical contact with the contaminated soil and waste; and 4) institutional controls are in place to prevent any unacceptable exposures to landfill waste or affected groundwater. For the remedy to be protective over the long term, the following action needs to be taken: 1) prepare a technical memorandum to summarize the Eastern Plume site activities over time, as well as an approach for addressing the 2009 amended SOW requirement for an MNA Work Plan associated with the Eastern Plume; 2) complete the Southern Plume 100 Percent Remedial Design Report and implement the optimized remedy for the Southern Plume; 3) continue to monitor PFAS in site groundwater and other media, as needed, and EPA will determine if PFAS should be added as a site COC; 4) submit a workplan for further investigation of the western area of the SCRA GWE system to determine if contaminated groundwater is bypassing the system; 5) install porewater wells and seepage meters directly along the shore of the reservoir and within each hydro-stratigraphic unit (US, UUI, LUI) to obtain data with which to demonstrate compliance with MCLs; and 6) conduct additional investigations to complete delineation of the groundwater contaminant plumes.
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA has conducted two five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review revealed that the management of migration part of the remedy is not functioning as intended by the decision documents. 1,4-Dioxane, a newly identified contaminant of concern (COC) in the Southern Plume, is migrating toward the Bellamy Reservoir and is a threat to a major drinking water source for the City of Portsmouth. It also determined that the the source control components of the remedy (sediment and Source Area removals, maintenance of the landfill cover, and the Source Control Remedial Action Groundwater Extraction (SCRA GWE) system) are generally functioning as intended by decision documents, although recent data suggest that contamination from the western portion of the landfill may be bypassing the SCRA GWE system to the west of EW-1. Although the remedy for the Southern Plume is not functioning as intended, plans are underway to optimize the Southern Plume groundwater remedy to address 1,4-dioxane and other site-related contaminants. In the interim, there are no current human exposures to contamination from the Site. Sampling of the intake water from the Bellamy Reservoir in 2020 and 2021 show no detections of 1,4-dioxane in the water supply and the 2021 Annual Water Quality Report for the City of Portsmouth water supply notes that water supply samples from the Bellamy Reservoir did not report PFAS above the state drinking water standards. Residences and businesses near the landfill are connected to the public water supply. The landfill cover and vegetation on the landfill prevent direct contact with contaminated soil and waste, and institutional controls (ICs) are in place to prevent use of groundwater and to restrict land use at the landfill. EPA concluded that the sitewide remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term, but that a series of actions are needed to ensure long term protectiveness. EPA is currently working with the NHDES and the Responsible parties in the implementation of the actions needed to ensure long term protectiveness. It is anticipated that EPA will start the 3rd Five Year Review in January 2027.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict the use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment, and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits, and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left on site and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remain onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this website, there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on the use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems, and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of documents above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted.
