TOWN GARAGE/RADIO BEACONLONDONDERRY, NH
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Town Garage/Radio Beacon site is located in Londonderry, New Hampshire. The area includes the Holton Circle neighborhood, the Town Garage property on High Range Road, a development of 20 homes called Saddlebrook, and a wetland area. The site includes a series of residential wells and one commercial well, known as the Town Garage Well. State tests in 1984 found contamination in several of the wells. The Town Garage property is believed to be the source area for this contamination. An open floor drain was removed from the Town Garage in 1996. The Department of Defense previously owned the Town Garage property, located 1,000 feet west of the Holton Circle development, from the early 1940s to 1968 and operated a radio beacon there during World War II. Following extension of public water supplies to affected areas, ground water cleanup levels were attained and the Site was deleted from the NPL in July 2014.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site was addressed through federal, state and PRP actions. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment.
What Is the Current Site Status?
After EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989, EPA assessed site conditions and determined that the extension of a public water supply system to the affected areas eliminated the immediate threat to human health. In addition, EPA determined that no further response actions are required to make the Site safe while natural attenuation of the groundwater occurred. EPA and the state continued to provide oversight for groundwater monitoring by the Site’s potentially responsible party (PRP) to measure the progress of the natural attenuation processes, and to ensure that existing residential wells in the area remained safe for groundwater consumption. A new residential development was built over part of the groundwater plume from 1997 to 1998. The development is served by public water and existing monitoring wells remain intact. The overall scope of the monitoring program was reduced in 2001, consistent with results that generally indicated stable or improving conditions. Several monitoring wells have also been decommissioned. Groundwater contaminant levels associated with the original contaminants of concern have been greatly reduced. Groundwater cleanup levels were attained and the Site was deleted from the NPL in July 2014.

Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are no longer required for this site as the site was deleted from the NPL in July 2014
