Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Site is located on Blackwater Road, about 1 mile southwest of the center of the city of Somersworth in Strafford County, New Hampshire. The Site is the location of a former sanitary landfill that accepted municipal and industrial wastes from the mid-1930s to 1981. Waste-burning activities also occurred on-site until 1958. The 26-acre landfill is located north of Blackwater Road and drains west to Peters Marsh Brook and an adjacent wetland. Waste disposal activities at the landfill resulted in contamination of groundwater with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), including chlorinated ethenes. The City of Somersworth (the City) owns the landfill property and much of the wetland areas northwest of the landfill. In 1978 and prior to the CERCLA remedial action, the City had redeveloped about 10 acres of the eastern portion of the landfill into a recreation area, which included ball fields and basketball courts. Use of these recreation facilities was discontinued in 2011, except for a paved basketball court on the southern fringe of the landfill. As part of the Site’s cleanup, a permeable soil cover was installed over the landfill.
After landfill activities ended at the Site in 1981, the City installed monitoring wells at the Site and identified VOC contamination in Site groundwater. As a result of the contamination, EPA added the Site to the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. With the actions taken, potential or actual human exposures and environmental impacts are under control. However, the public should heed all signage, physical restrictions and other administrative measures included as part of the cleanup plan to keep their risk to a minimum. The site’s 1994 cleanup plan included use of an innovative chemical treatment wall (CTW) to detoxify VOCs as the groundwater flows through the wall, with a final cap to be determined after cleanup. Construction of the CTW finished in 2000. A permeable soil cover, which allows precipitation to flush contaminants from the landfill through the CTW, plus an infiltration gallery and a bedrock extraction well, which both help in the flushing of the contaminated groundwater, were completed in 2001. Groundwater data and historical information confirmed that residents near the extraction well are not exposed to vapor intrusion from the contaminated groundwater. A site-specific background study in August 2012 confirmed that the observed levels of arsenic in nearby former recreational areas are in keeping with naturally occurring levels. EPA and the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services agreed with the report’s conclusion. Cleanup Progress.
What Is the Current Site Status?
After EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1983, EPA determined that site contamination did not pose an immediate threat to public health or the environment while cleanup activities were underway. A local zoning ordinance prohibiting groundwater use in a Groundwater Management Zone (GMZ) further protects the public health. The potential for explosive levels of landfill gas to collect in nearby structures was eliminated by the installation of a gas collection trench, which was completed in December 2003. Monitoring of landfill gas has shown that methane concentrations dropped to negligible levels. These trends show that the trench is effective in preventing landfill gas migration towards nearby homes. The remedy includes a Chemical Treatment Wall (CTW) to treat volatile organic compounds (VOCs) migrating in overburden groundwater away from the landfill. The CTW consists of a mixture of granular Zero Valent Iron (ZVI) and sand installed in a vertical trench around the downgradient edge of the landfill. It was constructed during the fall of 2000 by excavating overburden material to the bedrock surface using a guar-based biopolymer (BP) slurry to maintain the stability of the trench during excavation, prior to backfilling with a sand and iron mixture. Since 2004, there have been periodic breakthroughs in a section of the CTW (CTW-20 Transect) at the downgradient wells in the CTW-20 Transect (CTW-23U, CTW-23UA, and CTW-24U) of chlorinated ethenes (CEs) greater than Interim Cleanup Levels (>ICL). As a consequence of these periodic breakthroughs in concentrations >ICL between 2004 and 2014, investigations were conducted to evaluate the performance of the CTW in the vicinity of the CTW-20 Transect. The investigations of elevated concentrations began in 2015 and continued through an Optimization Review conducted by EPA in 2017, and into 2019. The investigations concluded that there was evidence from cores of the ZVI/sand mixture showing that the ZVI was not uniformly distributed in the vicinity of the CTW-20 Transect possibly due to construction issues. The top portion of the CTW in the immediate vicinity of the CTW-20 Transect was excavated to evaluate the clay and geotextile cap above the iron. It was observed that the top 4 to 6 inches of CTW material was well compacted with no evidence of excessive voids or preferential flow over top of the ZVI. The non-woven geotextile separator beneath the clay cap did not show evidence that a gap existed between the clay cap and CTW material (i.e., ZVI and sand mixture). Based on observations, the top couple of inches of CTW ZVI/sand mixture was likely periodically unsaturated during low water table periods. It was concluded that periodic unsaturation of the uppermost region of the CTW due to water table fluctuations may have resulted in oxidation of the iron, which could result in secondary iron oxides filling up the pore space, causing passivation of the iron. This region of the wall will still be moderately permeable, and therefore the groundwater will pass through the wall but experience limited treatment. Based on the results from the investigations between 2004 and 2019, EPA agreed that intervals in the CTW may exist where there is less ZVI in the iron/sand mixture resulting in less treatment in these “windows” and that passivation of the upper region of the ZVI within the CTW are still potential reasons that may explain periodic short-term breakthrough. Ultimately, the Work Settling Defendants (WSDs) and EPA acknowledged that additional efforts to confirm or discard the possible scenarios would likely result in additional cost without significant benefit. In 2021, concentrations of VOCs detected in the downgradient wells of the CTW-20 Transect indicated that another breakthrough had occurred. Wells located at the CTW-20 Transect again showed exceedances of cis-1,2-dichlorethene (cDCE) and vinyl chloride (VC) which triggered the need to evaluate a method to repair the CTW in the vicinity of the CTW-20 Transect to prevent further periodic short-term breakthrough. In the Optimization Review EPA recommended proceeding with relatively low-cost improvements in the CTW-20 Transect area as it was understood that “windows” in the ZVI create these unexpected and reduced treatment flow pathways resulting in periodic breakthrough of CEs. Two repair approaches were considered in the Optimization Review: the addition of more ZVI to provide additional coverage and complete treatment supporting the ongoing remedy of ZVI and monitored natural attenuation, or the addition of ZVI and enhancing bioremediation to provide a treatment zone upgradient of the CTW-20 Transect. In 2023, based on a feasibility review Evaluation of Remedial Alternatives at the CTW-20 Transect, ZVI alone was selected as the remediation technology for use in repairing the CTW-20 Transect because of its compatibility with the existing CTW material and its proven long-term efficacy in the CTW at the Site. As a result of the feasibility review’s constructability screening evaluation, a ZVI zone installed using the direct push technology (DPT) injection method was selected as best suited for achieving remedial objectives at the Site. Field injection activities were performed between November 6 and 9, 2023. Although some adjustments of the installation design and procedures were needed in the field, the entire design amount of ZVI included in the initial design was successfully emplaced across the 50-ft long injected PRB alignment. The WSDs plan to continue monitoring the performance of the CTW, including the CTW-20 Transect, and will report the evaluation of the CTW performance in the annual monitoring and demonstration of compliance reports. Operation and maintenance of the landfill permeable cover and chemical treatment wall, and groundwater monitoring is ongoing.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.

Sampling and Monitoring
.

Enforcement Information
EPA entered into a Consent Decree with two WSDs (the General Electric Company and the City) in March 1996. Under the Consent Decree, the WSDs agreed to perform the remedial design and remedial action for the selected remedy while other PRPs agreed to help finance the cleanup.
