Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
Green Remediation
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 2-acre Troy Mills Landfill site is located in Troy, New Hampshire. It is part of a larger 270-acre property. From 1967 to 1978, Troy Mills, Inc., a local fabric manufacturer operated a drum disposal area on site for an estimated 6,000 to 10,000 drums of liquid wastes and sludge. Immediately north of the former drum disposal area is a separate, 8-acre solid waste landfill regulated by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES), which was used until 2001 for the disposal of waste fabric scraps and other miscellaneous solid waste generated by manufacturing operations at the Troy Mills, Inc. complex. The solid waste landfill is not part of the Superfund site. Following the removal of drums, liquid waste, sludge and contaminated soil, groundwater monitoring is ongoing. In leachate, the major contaminant of concern (COC) is bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (BEHP) aka di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP). In wetland soil, the major COC is manganese, and in groundwater, the major COCs are 1,4-Dioxane, cis-1,2 Dichloroethene, and bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate, and manganese. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal actions. Completing the drum removal action greatly reduced the risk posed to public health and the environment from potential uncontrolled releases from the buried drums. As a result, EPA determined that the site did not pose any further immediate threat to human health and the environment. EPA then issued a long-term cleanup plan for the site in 2005 that required the restoration of the groundwater to safe drinking water levels. Long-term remedial actions began in 2006 and were implemented to address remaining Site risks through monitored natural attenuation (MNA) of groundwater contaminants; collection and off-site disposal of light non-aqueous phase liquid (LNAPL); monitoring of groundwater, surface water, sediment, leachate, and wetland soil quality; maintaining the permeable soil cap over the former drum disposal area; and implementing appropriate Institutional Controls. In 2014 EPA updated cleanup levels for several COCs and updated Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) both to include revised State and federal standards and to identify additional standards that were not specifically identified in the Record of Decision. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy, selected in 2005, involves allowing naturally occurring processes to reduce contaminant concentrations in groundwater (i.e., monitored natural attenuation); continuing the capture and removal of free product from groundwater using the interceptor trenches; maintaining the permeable soil cap over the drum excavation area; and institutional controls. Long-term monitoring of groundwater, surface water, sediment, leachate and wetlands is ongoing. In 2013, the LNAPL interceptor trenches were decommissioned and removed as anticipated in the original Record of Decision. It was determined that the trenches were no longer needed to remove migrating LNAPL. In 2014, an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) was issued documenting the trench decommissioning and updating cleanup goals at the Site. As of September 2017, the State of New Hampshire is responsible for long-term operation and maintenance (O&M) of the remedy. Ongoing O&M activities include: a) ﻿Annual Inspection and maintenance of the soil cap to verify: 
maintanance of the vegetative growth and soil cover through annual reseeding, fertilizing, and mowing, as necessary;
repair of the soil cover if settlement occurs;
land use activities are not causing impacts to the cover materials; and
maintanance of the gates and Site perimeter engineering controls. 
b) ﻿Annual Inspection and maintenance of the monitoring well network to verify: 
maintenance or replacement of monitoring well locks;
replacement of monitoring well protective casings or surface seals if damaged;
redevelopment of monitoring wells if sediment accumulates in them;
replacement of damaged dedicated sampling equipment; and
sampling and analysis of groundwater, surface water, sediment, wetland soil and leachate. 
A limited Supplemental Site Investigation to assess the extent of PFAS contamination in the groundwater was conducted in 2022. Additional monitoring wells were installed as part of this Investigation and their groundwater samples analysis showed detections of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in groundwater within the eastern portion of the solid waste landfill, in the bedrock groundwater within the lower drum disposal area, in the overburden groundwater within the northwesterly portion of the solid waste landfill, beyond the Groundwater Management Zone (GMZ) boundaries, and in the overburden groundwater approximately 275 feet downgradient of the northern, downgradient-most point of the GMZ.  Based on the recently collected PFAS concentration data, PFAS likely emanates from a source or sources within, and immediately north of, the drum disposal area and within the solid waste landfill. The concentrations of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) detected in samples collected from the recently installed monitoring wells document the exceedance of the EPA Site-Specific Regional Screening Levels (RSLs) and/or New  Hampshire Ambient Groundwater Quality Standards (AGQS) beyond the GMZ boundaries and show that the downgradient limit of PFOA, PFNA, and PFOS exceeding the EPA RSLs and/or AGQS has not been identified. EPA has funded a cooperative agreement for NHDES to conduct a Remedial Investigation/Focused Feasibility Study (RI/FFS). The RI will help identify the downgradient limit of the PFAS contamination, will be used to update the Conceptual Site Model (CSM) and to support the FFS, which will include an evaluation of technologies in support of a review of alternatives which, when combined with the current MNA remedy, could result in a comprehensive and sustainable future remedy in minimizing the migration of PFAS from the Site. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site. This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of document, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
Here is a link to the latest data report: https://sems.epa.gov/work/1706125346684/01-675282.pdf 
Top of Page
Green Remediation
A solar co-generation facility on top of the landfill is a possibility and is being explored with the State and the Town. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
As part of a bankruptcy settlement with the United States, approved by the court on June 27, 2008 (In re: Troy Mills, Incorporated, BK. No.:01-13341), the Trustee for the Bankruptcy Estate of Troy Mills, Inc. signed an Easement Deed and Restrictive Covenants to the State of New Hampshire to establish ICs over the Site in November 2009, which was recorded in January 2010.
Top of Page