M&T DELISA LANDFILLASBURY PARK, NJ 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The M & T Delisa Landfill disposed of municipal waste from 1945 to 1975 on a 132-acre site in Asbury Park. In 1976, Seaview Square Mall was constructed on about 25 to 30 acres of the landfill i. The mall construction incorporated control measures to address the potential for contamination. Refuse was excavated and the mall itself is situated on clean fill. However, since the parking lot is built on refuse, methane gas vents and a system to collect leachate were installed in the lot. In 1980, the EPA observed leachate seeping from the site into a nearby stream that empties into Deal Lake. However, investigations indicated that ground water, surface water, and soil were not impacted by the M & T Delisa Site (Site). In 1983, the mall and surrounding outside areas were tested for methane gas migration. The results indicated a plume of methane existed about 1 to 3 feet below the ground outside the mall. Approximately 2,300 people live within a 1-mile radius of the Site. There are 34 private wells within 3 miles of the landfill, and approximately 120 people draw drinking water from these wells. Deal Lake is less than a mile away and is used for recreational activities, including fishing. Site Responsibility: This Site was addressed through Federal and potentially responsible parties' actions. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
After the M & T Delisa Site was added to the NPL, a study to determine the nature and extent of contamination revealed that there were no significant concentrations of hazardous substances at the Site. The Site has been deleted from the NPL and will be addressed under State authorities.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The owner of the Site, under EPA monitoring, conducted a study to 
determine the extent of groundwater, surface water, and soil 
contamination at the Site. The study indicated that the Site is not a 
source of significant concentrations of any hazardous substances. In 
September 1990, the EPA determined that the Site would be addressed more
 appropriately by the State under its solid waste disposal regulations. The Site was deleted from the National Priorities List on March 6, 1991 and turned over to the State to be addressed under the State's solid waste disposal regulations. 
Top of Page