DAYCO CORP./L.E CARPENTER CO.WHARTON BOROUGH, NJ 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Dayco Corp./L.E. Carpenter Company site is a former vinyl wall covering manufacturing facility located in Wharton Borough, New Jersey. The facility operated on the 14.5-acre property from 1943 to 1987, generating various solid and liquid wastes that were disposed of in unlined, on-site lagoons located approximately 20 feet from the Rockaway River.  As a result of these disposal practices, the site groundwater is contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which are potentially harmful contaminants that easily evaporate into the air.  Small amounts of site-related contaminants have been found in Rockaway River sediment and in a drainage channel located adjacent to the site. EPA placed the site on the National Priorites List (NPL) in April 1985. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA is addressing the site in two stages; initial response actions to eliminate the immediate risk to human health and the environment, and a long-term cleanup phase focused on the entire site. Initial response actions: The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) conducted soil and groundwater sampling at the site in 1980 and 1981. The sampling results indicated the presence of VOCs, base neutral compounds, metals, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). In addition, light non-aqueous phase liquid (LNAPL), or floating product, was observed on top of the groundwater table. In response, L.E. Carpenter and NJDEP entered into an Administrative Consent Order (ACO) in 1982 in which L.E. Carpenter agreed to clean up the contaminated soil and groundwater at the site.  L.E. Carpenter excavated and disposed of about 4,000 cubic yards of contaminated sludge from a former surface impoundment, constructed a floating product recovery system, and installed a network of groundwater monitoring wells at the site in 1982. Sixteen aboveground and underground storage tanks and associated contaminated soil were also removed. As part of the long-term cleanup phase, NJDEP and L.E. Carpenter entered into an amended ACO in 1986 to conduct a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) at the site. Under NJDEP oversight, L.E. Carpenter conducted the RI/FS from 1986 to 1993. In 1994, NJDEP issued a Record of Decision (ROD), selecting a cleanup plan to address the contamination at the site. The cleanup plan included removing soil hot spot areas, including lead-contaminated soil above 600 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg); off-site disposal of the excavated contaminated soil; removing the floating product via an active removal system; groundwater extraction and biological treatment; infiltration of the treated groundwater; vegetative soil cover, and land use restrictions. EPA and NJDEP subsequently approved a modified cleanup plan for the site. Under the revised plan, lead-contaminated soil would be excavated to the residential cleanup level of 400 mg/kg; a large area containing LNAPL and LNAPL-saturated smear zone soil, as well as a small PCB-contaminated area would be excavated and disposed of off-site and residually-contaminated groundwater would be monitored after the soil had been excavated to determine whether it could be addressed via natural attenuation. Natural attenuation describes a variety of processes that, under favorable conditions, act without human intervention to reduce the mass, toxicity, mobility, volume, or concentration of contaminants in groundwater.  In 2005, 46,521 tons of contaminated soil and floating product were excavated and removed off-site for disposal and thirteen groundwater monitoring wells were installed at the site. EPA issued an Explanation of Significant Differences in 2007 to document the changes to the selected cleanup plan. Post-remediation monitoring indicated the possible presence of residual soil contamination in the area at the corner of Ross and North Main Streets and a wetland area near the Rockaway River. Accordingly, in 2007, NJDEP requested that L.E. Carpenter develop an aggressive cleanup approach to address any residual contamination in these areas.  After assuming the enforcement lead for the site in July 2009, EPA issued an order to L.E. Carpenter related to its performance of the investigation and cleanup of the residual contamination in these areas and continue the groundwater natural attemuation evaluation. From 2009 tol 2010, the building on the corner of Ross and North Main Streets was demolished and approximately 2,600 cubic yards of VOC-contaminated soil was removed and sent off-site for disposal. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The excavation and off-site disposal of residual soil contamination in the Eastern Drainage Ditch was completed in July 2023. . Pre-excavation sampling to fully delineate the excavation footprint in the wetland area was performed in March 2024. The sample results show that there is deeper contamination. Another round of pre-excavation sampling and/or a change in the planned excavation method (under slurry) may be necessary. The potentially responsible is preparing a letter report that will propose a path forward. The groundwater is sampled quarterly for water quality and natural attenuation parameters as part of the site’s post-remediation monitoring program and an ongoing sitewide evaluation of natural attenuation of contaminants in the groundwater. A final cleanup plan for the sitewide groundwater will be selected after the wetland excavation is completed and additional (post-excavation) groundwater monitoring is performed. Top of Page