KAUFFMAN & MINTEER, INC.SPRINGFIELD TWP(JOBSTOWN), NJ 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The five-acre Kauffman & Minteer (K&M), Inc. site in Jobstown, New Jersey is the former site of an industrial transportation facility where hazardous wastewater from cleaning the inside of trucks was discharged into a drainage ditch and an unlined lagoon from 1960 to 1981. A protective dike surrounding the lagoon broke in 1984, releasing the hazardous wastewater off-site to a neighboring property and nearby wetlands. These wastewater discharges contaminated shallow groundwater beneath the site and threatened the middle aquifer, a major source of drinking water. Following initial actions to protect people's health and the environment, EPA addressing the longer terms risks at the site. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA injected chemical oxidants designed to break down contaminants into the areas of groundwater thought to be the source of contamination from 2007 through 2010. The injections in the source area reduced the level of contaminants and EPA is monitoring the groundwater, including in areas downgradient of the source. The second phase of the groundwater cleanup calls for the pumping and on-site treatment of the remaining contaminated groundwater. Additionally, EPA has modified the cleanup plan to include in-situ, or in place bioremediation (a cleanup technique that uses microbes/living organisms to clean up contaminated groundwater). 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
 EPA will treat volatile organic contaminants, specifically trichloroethylene (TCE) and 1,2-dichloroethane, using bioremediation which uses microbes/living organisms to clean up contaminated groundwater. EPA completed the engineering design work for the groundwater bioremediation in 2017 and, after updating it with recently collected data, expects to begin the cleanup in late 2024. Top of Page