Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 16-acre Lipari Landfill site includes a 6-acre inactive landfill that, between 1958 and 1971, accepted household waste, liquid and semi-solid chemical wastes, and other industrial materials. These wastes were disposed of in trenches originally excavated for sand and gravel. Approximately 3,000,000 gallons of liquid wastes and 12,000 cubic yards of solid wastes were disposed of at the site. Some of the wastes included solvents, paints and thinners, formaldehyde, dust collector residues, resins, and solid press cakes from the industrial production of paints and solvents. Prior to the closing of the landfill in 1971 by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, at least one explosion and two fires were reported at the site. Contaminants seeped into the underlying aquifers and leached into nearby marshlands, Chestnut Branch, Rabbit Run, and Alcyon Lake. The lake was subsequently closed for recreational use. Although approximately 11,000 people depend on groundwater for drinking water supplies within three miles of the site, drinking water supplies were not found to be contaminated. Fruit orchards, commercial businesses, and a technology park are located adjacent to the site. Chestnut Branch is a tributary to the Delaware River. Initial Actions: The EPA installed and sampled 16 monitoring wells to determine the direction of groundwater flow and the extent of contamination. The EPA installed a security fence in 1982 to restrict access to the landfill; additional fencing was installed between 1983 and 1985 to restrict access to neighboring wetlands areas that had been impacted. After initial actions to protect human health and the environment, and preliminary investigations, the EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1983. Source Control: In 1982, the EPA constructed a landfill containment system consisting of an underground cut-off wall around the area and a synthetic membrane cover over the landfill surface to stop pollutants from migrating from the landfill. The EPA completed the cut-off wall and landfill cap in 1984. In 2011, an additional slurry wall was installed to contain contamination that had been located outside of the original wall and also to reduce the amount of groundwater that required treatment. Additionally, a new cap was placed over the area within the 2011 cut-off wall. This cap was completed in 2012. Groundwater, Leachate, and Vapor Treatment: In 1985, the EPA selected a remedy to clean up the groundwater and leachate from the landfill. The remedy included: (1) installing extraction and injection wells within the landfill containment system to batch flush the system of water- soluble contaminants and pump out the contaminated leachate and groundwater for treatment; (2) installing wells within the underlying Kirkwood aquifer to monitor the groundwater downgradient of the site; and (3) treating the pumped water on-site prior to discharge to a nearby county sewer system. The EPA installed the landfill injection and extraction wells and completed construction of the treatment plant in January 1992. Optimization operations of the wells and treatment plant were completed in 1993 and batch flushing was initiated. In 2000, the batch flushing system was adapted for simultaneous soil vapor extraction to enhance the removal of volatile, less water soluble contaminants. In 2008, landfill flushing and on-site aqueous pre-treatment were discontinued because contaminant concentrations had leveled off to asymptotic levels within the landfill. The on-site dual phase extraction-soil vapor extraction (DPE-SVE) and treatment system continues to operate solely in the vapor phase. The operation of the thermal oxidation unit (TOU) was discontinued in 2015 and contaminants in the airstream from the DPE-SVE are now removed by the vapor granular activated carbon units (VGAC). Upgrades and testing of the VGAC system were completed in 2015. The influx of fresh make-up air into the landfill is thought to be enhancing the biological remediation of contaminants in the landfill. Off-Site Contamination: In 1988, the EPA selected a remedy to clean up off-site groundwater, soil, and sediment contamination that was not secured in the landfill containment system. The major components of this remedy included: (1) collecting groundwater and leachate in the aquifers outside the containment system for on-site treatment and discharge to the local county sewage treatment system; (2) excavating contaminated soil in Chestnut Branch Marsh, and dredging and dewatering contaminated sediments in Alcyon Lake, Chestnut Branch, and Rabbit Run, followed by removing organic contaminants with a low temperature volatilization system (LTVS); and (3) monitoring off-site areas to ensure the effectiveness of the on-site cleanup. Treatment of contaminated soil and sediment with the LTVS was completed in late summer 1995. The lake, which had been closed for recreational use for a number of years due to contamination from the Lipari Landfill, was reopened in October 1995. The EPA continues to capture and treat contaminated groundwater from beneath the landfill. EPA routinely monitors off-site surface and groundwater to ensure the remedy is functioning as designed and remains protective of human health and the environment. Site Facts: In 1982, the EPA and Nicholas Lipari, property owner, entered into a Consent Decree. In 1993, the EPA and the State of New Jersey reached a partial settlement embodied in a Consent Decree with the three primary responsible parties. That settlement recovered costs incurred and expected to be incurred to remediate the on-site contamination. In 1994, the EPA and the State of New Jersey reached a second partial settlement with one primary responsible party. Under this settlement, embodied in a Consent Decree, the responsible party implemented the off-site remedy. Costs associated with the off-site remediation were recovered in partial settlements with the remaining two primary responsible parties in 1996 and 1999, respectively. Following initial actions to protect human health and the environment, the EPA implemented the site’s long-term remedy. Under current conditions at the site, harmful pollutants are captured, treated, and under control. Groundwater, surface water, and air are monitored on a regular basis to make sure the surrounding community and environment are not exposed to hazardous chemicals. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 1982, the EPA put in a security fence to restrict access to the landfill. EPA installed additional fencing between 1983 and 1985 to restrict access to neighboring wetlands areas. Also in 1982, the EPA selected a remedy to stop pollutants from migrating from the landfill. It included constructing a landfill containment system consisting of an underground cut-off wall around the area, and placement of a synthetic membrane cover over the landfill surface. The EPA completed the cut-off wall and landfill cap in 1984. In 1985, the EPA selected a remedy to clean up groundwater and leachate from the landfill. It included: (1) installing extraction and injection wells within the landfill containment system to batch flush the system of water soluble contaminants and pump out contaminated leachate and groundwater for treatment; (2) installing wells within the underlying Kirkwood Aquifer to monitor groundwater downgradient of the site; and (3) treating pumped water on site prior to discharging it to the nearby county sewer system. In 1990, the EPA began constructing the groundwater treatment plant. The batch flushing method was modified in August 1996 so that the injection of clean water into the containment system and the extraction of contaminated water by pumping of the extraction wells occurred simultaneously. From 1992 to 2008, the landfill interior was flushed with clean water to remove soluble chemicals; contaminated water was then extracted and treated on site, before being sent for final treatment at the county sewage treatment plant. Landfill flushing resulted in significant reductions of contaminant concentrations. In 2000, a vapor extraction and treatment system were installed on-site to clean up the landfill’s toxic vapors. The system continues to operate. It has removed and treated more than 215 tons of contaminants. In 2008, the EPA groundwater flushing and extraction operations ended. When batch flushing operations ceased and landfill interior water levels dropped, new areas of vapor contamination were exposed resulting in additional areas requiring vapor contamination removal. The continued operation of the soil vapor extraction/dual phase extraction (SVE/DPE) blower provides several benefits to the on-site remedy, as follows: it maintains a negative pressure on the containment system which prevents the release of landfill vapors into the neighborhood; it maintains an aerobic environment that allows naturally occurring microorganisms to continue degrading Bis(chloroethyl)ether (BCEE) the site’s primary contaminant of concern (COC); and it prevents the buildup of potentially explosive methane concentrations. Although the SVE wells are currently being utilized only periodically to vent methane, in the future, these wells might be used to accelerate remediation in the area between the slurry wall and the French Drain. In 2011 and 2012, an additional slurry wall was completed in order to surround an area of trash and contaminated soil on the northern portion of the site that was outside of the then existing slurry wall. This slurry wall and high-density polyethylene (HDPE) cap have been continuously monitored since construction and both appear to be functioning as designed. However, in some areas of the cap, particularly on the western side, consolidation of the buried trash has caused depressions in the cap. EPA completed repairs on some of these cap depressions in April 2013, additional depressions may need to be repaired in the future. In 2015, the effluent tank was taken out of service and re-routed to the clarifier effluent sump. In addition, the thermal oxidation unit (TOU) was Terminated and Replaced with vapor phase granular activated carbon (VGAC). Bis-2-Chloroethyl Ether analysis using the selected ion monitoring technique (BCEE-SIM) and sampling modification for BCEE results as an indicator of containment site Contaminants of Concern (COC) were implemented. Sampling for metals and all organic compounds continued but BCEE was discontinued at several locations. The rationale for this reduction in analyses was very few BCEE positive results/exceedances and the ability of BCEE to adequately serve as a surrogate to indicate containment for all site COCs. In 2017, an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) documents the remedy selected in the 1985 OU2 Record of Decision (ROD), as clarified in a 1986 ROD clarification letter, and explained in the 1992 ESD, is still the most appropriate means of protecting human health and the environment, but that operation of the batch flushing system at the site has reached the limits of technology. Because the batch flushing no longer was effective in removing contaminants from the groundwater within the containment wall, the operation was changed permanently to discontinue batch flushing and lower the water level to maintain an inward gradient within the containment wall; and the continued operation of the soil vapor extraction system to remove contaminants present in the soil vapor within the containment. This containment remedy requires long-term Operation and Maintenance (O&M), which, as required by CERCLA, will be performed by the State. In 2020, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection established a Classification Exception Area/Well Restriction Area (CEA/WRA) for contamination in groundwater associated with this site. Groundwater, surface water, and air are monitored on a regular basis to ensure that the surrounding community and environment are not exposed to hazardous chemicals. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
As of August 14, 2019, New Jersey Department Environmental Protection (NJDEP) took over the daily operation and maintenance of the remedial action at the Lipari Landfill site. The EPA oversaw/performed the remedial actions required for the site prior to transfer. September 29, 2023 NJDEP recorded the signed Deed Notices to ensure that activities that would pose a risk to human health and the environment are prohibited in the future. Now, the Deed Notices, CEA/WRA and fencing of the on-site area further prevents contact with contamination. The Lipari Landfill Superfund Site was deleted from the National Priorities List on August 16, 2024. Groundwater, surface water, and vapors are monitored on a regular basis to ensure that the surrounding community and environment are not exposed to hazardous chemicals. The EPA will continue to conduct five-year reviews of the Site.
Top of Page