COMBE FILL NORTH LANDFILLMOUNT OLIVE TOWNSHIP, NJ 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Combe Fill North Landfill site operated as a sanitary municipal landfill from 1966 to 1978, accepting domestic and industrial wastes, along with dry sewage sludge. Combe Fill Corporation (CFC) purchased the 65-acre landfill in 1978.  The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP discovered contaminated groundwater beneath the Site and in private residential wells near the site. The groundwater and the indoor air at the site were contaminated with volatile organic compounds  (VOCs).  Runoff flowed across the landfill’s surface and drained into the creeks that border the site. The landfill was not properly closed when CFC went bankrupt in 1981. The area surrounding the Site is primarily wooded, with small residential areas, farms, retail centers, and light industry. Approximately 10,000 people rely on groundwater supplied from wells approximately two miles from the site. EPA and NJDEP selected a cleanup plan for the site in 1986, which was completed in 1991. NJDEP is leading the monitoring efforts for the groundwater and air to ensure that the cleanup remains protective of human health and the environment. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA and the NJDEP selected and completed a cleanup plan that included: grading and compacting the waste disposal area, covering the landfill with clay to prevent surface water and rainwater from coming into contact with the buried waste, installing a system to collect drainage from the site, installing a ventilation system for the methane gas, and installing a fence around the site. NJDEP is leading the monitoring efforts for the groundwater and air to ensure that the cleanup remains protective of human health and the environment.   EPA has completed five five-year reviews at the site and an addendum in 2015 to the September 2014 five-year review report. EPA conducts reviews of completed cleanups every five years to ensure they remain protective of human health and the environment. The fifth five-year review was completed in September 2019 and recommended the installation of new monitoring wells near the landfill and their inclusion in the regular sampling events to fully identify the groundwater plume, which is an area where contaminants are dispersed. NJDEP found high concentrations of 1,4-dioxane in several private/commercial drinking water wells in 2014 and 2015. Following this finding, NJDEP offered bottled water to all affected residential/commercial wells. NJDEP and Mount Olive Township recommended installing a waterline for the private and commercial drinking wells on Ringenbach Lane, Lucas Street, Old Budd Lake Road, and along Route 46. NJDEP installed the municipal water supply line in 2017 to affected residences located between the northern boundary of the site and Route 46. The waterline extension was completed in March 2019 and included additional properties along Route 46, providing residential communities with drinking water from a municipal water source.  Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
NJDEP is planning to install wells that can detect contamination from the site and determine whether contaminants have impacted the public water supply wells, or if any new wells that were installed near the site may be impacted. NJDEP will continue to monitor and sample the groundwater. Top of Page