Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Pohatcong Valley Groundwater Contamination Superfund site includes parts of Washington Borough, Washington Township, Franklin Township and Greenwich Township in Warren County, New Jersey. The site is defined by areas, or “plumes,” of contaminated groundwater that are approximately 10 miles long and approximately one and a half miles wide. Plumes are areas where contaminants disperse. Trichloroethylene (TCE) and perchloroethylene (PCE) are contaminating the Kittatinny Limestone Aquifer underneath Pohatcong Valley. The aquifer serves as the sole source of drinking water for public water systems and private parties in the area. There are two groundwater plumes at the site. One plume is contaminated primarily with TCE (known as the TCE plume) while the other plume is contaminated primarily with PCE (known as the PCE plume). EPA separated the site into three areas, known as Operable Units (OUs). OU1 includes contaminated groundwater within Washington Borough and parts of Washington and Franklin Townships, encompassing about 5,600 acres. OU2 is the groundwater contamination downgradient (in the direction of groundwater flow) of OU1 within portions of Franklin and Greenwich Townships, encompassing 4,200 acres. OU3 includes areas of contaminated soil within the OU1 area, which covers the former American National Can (ANC) facility, now owned by Albea Americas, Inc., and adjacent areas in Washington Borough. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Warren County Department of Health and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) installed public water supply connections to homes and businesses within the contaminated area of Washington Township after they found two public water supply wells with elevated levels of trichloroethylene (TCE) and perchloroethylene (PCE) by 1989. They also sealed impacted wells and created a well restriction area. The Warren County Department of Health and NJDEP also added wellhead treatment systems to the public supply wells to treat groundwater to state and federal drinking water standards before distribution. EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in March 1989. Immediate Actions: Warren County supplied bottled water in the mid-1980s to affected residences in the Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Study Area where drinking water contamination exceeded state standards. NJDEP hooked up most affected businesses and residences to public water supply wells in 1988 and 1989. Most affected residences in the OU1 TCE area are currently connected to a municipal drinking water supply. Under EPA oversight, the potentially responsible parties (PRPs) continue to monitor groundwater drinking water wells in the area. NJDEP continues to connect people to public water if contamination is found above acceptable levels. EPA and the PRPs sample the private drinking well water in residences within an area of OU2 called the OU2 Threatened and Impacted (T&I) Area to ensure residences with private drinking wells are protected while the OU2 cleanup is cleaned up. Work under EPA’s cleanup plan to install and extend a waterline to connect 280 homes to the public water supply was completed in December 2020. If samples identify levels of contamination above the drinking water standards for TCE, the NJDEP follows up, taking actions such as installing Point of Entry Treatment Systems (POETs) on private drinking water wells. To date, NJDEP installed POETs at about 80 residences. POETs are small treatment systems connected to a residential water supply line to remove volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from groundwater using activated carbon. NJDEP periodically samples the water and replaces it to ensure POETs remain protective of human health. NJDEP services some POETS and collects confirmation samples to make sure the systems operate properly. The water of the residents with POETs within the OU2 study area are monitored by the PRP’s contractors. The last sampling was in Spring 2021. EPA also has assessed in 2007 whether vapors of TCE or PCE are getting into buildings or homes via a process called “vapor intrusion.”  For any buildings where we identified a problem, EPA installed vapor intrusion systems that vent or direct vapors that have the potential to collect under the property to the outside air. EPA installed a system in one public school and one residence along the site’s OU1 and OU2 boundary. EPA also installed vapor intrusion systems in one apartment building in Washington Borough in early 2010. Buildings throughout the OU3 Study Area were screened in 2013 for potential vapor intrusion during the OU3 investigation. The only building determined to have the potential for vapor intrusion was the former ANC building. The PRP under EPA oversight installed soil vapor extraction (SVE) and sub-slab depressurization (SSD) systems to treat the TCE vapors associated with soil to a depth of approximately five feet below the building slab. EPA continues to periodically sample for vapor intrusion throughout the site.  Long-term Cleanup: The OU1 TCE and OU1 PCE areas include a large area of groundwater contamination in portions of Washington Borough and Franklin Township. Most of the residents of this area receive drinking water from a public water supply that meets drinking water standards. EPA selected a cleanup plan in a 2006 Record of Decision (ROD) to extract or draw out and treat contaminated groundwater. Engineering designs to implement the cleanup has been completed. 
The OU1 TCE groundwater extraction, treatment and reinjection system (GWTP) began operating in 2016. It extracts approximately 500 gallons per minute (gpm) of contaminated groundwater for treatment. The treated groundwater then gets reinjected back into the aquifer. A similar system for OU1 PCE GWTP began operating in 2016. The OU1 PCE system extracts approximately 50 gpm of contaminated groundwater to be treated then reinjected back into the aquifer.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Operable Unit 1 (OU1) OU1 is further subdivided into the OU1 TCE plume and OU1 PCE plume. The OU1 TCE plume contains groundwater primarily contaminated with TCE that came from the former ANC facility. The OU1 PCE plume contains groundwater primarily contaminated with PCE from the former Tung-Sol Tubing facility. The entire OU1 area covers Washington Borough, Washington Township, and the northern portion of Franklin Township. The OU1 PCE area is significantly smaller than the OU1 TCE area, and it located solely within Washington Borough. The OU1 TCE area extends from the former ANC facility southward to about Asbury-Broadway Road.  EPA selected a cleanup plan documented in a 2006 ROD for both contaminated groundwater plumes identified in OU1. The ROD called for a groundwater extraction and treatment plants to address the most highly contaminated portions of the separate OU1 TCE and OU1 PCE plumes. Thus, there were two separate designs for each of the treatment plants in the OU1 TCE and OU1 PCE areas. Both designs are complete and both groundwater extraction, treatment, and recharge systems have been constructed and have been operational since 2016. Operable Unit 2 (OU2)
OU2 is TCE-contaminated groundwater from the OU1 TCE Plume. OU2 is an area in the direction of groundwater flow of the OU1 area in portions of Franklin and Greenwich Townships. Except for a few homes, there is no public drinking water supply currently available in the exact OU2 Threatened and Impacted Area (T&I Area). EPA periodically samples residential and commercial private drinking water wells in the T&I Area. NJDEP treats individual drinking water wells affected by site contamination. Under a 2010 ROD, EPA oversaw the construction of water lines and service connections throughout the T&I Area to provide drinking water. The water lines were completed in December 2020. Operable Unit 3 (OU3)
OU3 includes the soil source areas for groundwater contamination, the former ANC facility in Washington Township and three adjacent properties. EPA issued a ROD for OU3 in September 2016.  The OU3 ROD calls for addressing deep soil contamination underneath the former ANC building through vapor extraction (SVE) and/or thermal treatment. The ROD also calls for the long-term operation and maintenance of the existing shallow SVE system and sub-slab depressurization (SSD) systems, which prevents vapor intrusion by directing hazardous vapors in the soil to the exterior of the former ANC building. Finally, the ROD also calls for long-term groundwater and indoor air monitoring in the OU3 study area and institutional controls. The long-term operation, maintenance, and monitoring are ongoing. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
At this site, EPA put activity and use limitations called institutional controls into place. Institutional controls play an important role in site cleanups because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use. There is also a site-wide Classification Exemption Area (CEA) to restrict the use of groundwater in the OU1 and OU2 contaminated area. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
The U.S. Department of Justice and EPA reached a settlement in March 2015 with several companies to address the site. Companies included Pechiney Plastic Packaging, Inc. (Pechiney), Albea Americas, Inc., Bristol Meyers Squibb Company, Citigroup Inc., and Rexam Beverage Can Company.  The settlement resulted in funds recovered for EPA past costs as well as funding to complete the OU1 TCE and OU2 cleanup actions. Under the terms of the settlement and with EPA oversight, a group of PRPs will cleanup OU1 TCE, OU2 and OU3. Top of Page