FRANKLIN BURNFRANKLIN TOWNSHIP, NJ 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Franklin Burn site is located in Franklin Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey and includes seven separate parcels of land, known as subsites. At each of these subsites, scrap copper wire and possibly other electrical components were placed on the ground and burned to remove the plastic coatings and insulation so that the remaining copper could be recovered for sale. The burning process generated contaminated ash and debris piles, which contained hazardous substances that contaminated site soil, sediment, groundwater and small pools of surface water. The seven separate parcels of land of the Franklin Burn site are referred to as subsites 1 through 7. All subsites are within an area approximately one square mile in size, located in Franklin Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey. Fires were set at each subsite to burn away the plastic coatings from insulated wire and other electrical components for the recovery and sale of copper. The burning generated ash piles containing hazardous substances. Site burning activities are reported to have stoppedin 1988 and have remained inactive since that time. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Before the Remedial Investigation (RI) was completed, approximately 10,063 tons of debris, ash, and contaminated soil were excavated and disposed of off-site. Source control actions, consolidating and/or removing contaminated soil, and fencing reduced or eliminated the potential for exposure to contaminated soil. These actions occured while the RI was being conducted. Based on the completed response actions, studies and site-specific risk assessment, EPA determined that residual contamination levels do not pose an unacceptable risk and, therefore, no further cleanup is required. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site has been addressed in two stages: initial actions and a long-term remedial phase. Under the Superfund Accelerated Cleanup Model (SACM), soil and ash removal activities were completed at all seven subsites by 1997. Approximately 10,063 tons of contaminated ash and soil were excavated and disposed of off-site. Source control actions, consolidating and/or removing contaminated soil, in addition to installation of fencing, reduced or eliminated the potential for exposure to contaminated soil while the RI was being conducted. Based on the completed response actions, studies and site-specific risk assessment, EPA determined that residual contamination levels do not pose an unacceptable risk and, therefore, no further cleanup is required. Top of Page