POMONA OAKS RESIDENTIAL WELLSGALLOWAY TOWNSHIP, NJ 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Pomona Oaks Residential Wells site is located in Galloway Township, New Jersey. It includes the Pomona Oaks residential subdivision and a shopping center.Construction of homes in the Pomona Oaks subdivision began in 1972. Initially, homes in the subdivision relied upon private wells as the source of potable water and upon individual septic systems for wastewater disposal. In 1982, local residents reported a foul taste and odor in their drinking water to the State of New Jersey. Sampling found VOCs in the water; bottled water was provided to some area residents. By 1985, all Pomona Oaks subdivision residences were connected to the public water supply.After immediate actions to protect human health and the environment, EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in June 1986 In 1982, local residents reported a foul taste and odor in their drinking water to the State of New Jersey. Sampling found volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the water; bottled water was provided to some area residents. By 1985, all Pomona Oaks subdivision residences were connected to the public water supply. The State put in a new municipal well for the community that remains in use. By providing an alternate safe drinking water source to area residents, the possibility of exposure to polluted water was virtually eliminated. EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in May 1998. EPA continues to monitor the site. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Immediate Actions: In 1985, EPA began providing bottled water to area residents. The local water supplier, New Jersey Water Company, extended water lines and the distribution system in 1985 to serve affected homes. Existing wells have been sealed. A new primary water well for the community was designed by the State of New Jersey, and construction finished in 1988. The well was put in service in August 1989.Groundwater: From 1986 to 1990, EPA studied the nature and extent of air and groundwater contamination at the site. EPA determined that no further action was necessary at the site because contamination levels had fallen below levels requiring cleanup, and nearby residents had been provided with safe drinking water. In February 1992, EPA sampled groundwater from monitoring wells on site and downgradient. No significant contamination was found above maximum contaminant levels.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site was addressed in two stages: immediate actions and a long-term remedial phase focused on cleanup of the groundwater.The local water supplier, New Jersey Water Company, extended water lines
 and the distribution system in 1985 to serve the affected homes.  Existing wells have been sealed. A new primary water well for the 
community was designed by the State, and construction was completed in 
1988. In February 1992, EPA sampled groundwater from monitoring wells on site 
and downgradient. No significant contamination was found above maximum 
contaminant levels. A Close Out Report, the first step in the NPL site 
deletion process, was signed by the Regional Administrator in September,
 1992. EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in May 1998. EPA continues to monitor the site.
Top of Page