BEACHWOOD/BERKELEY WELLSBERKELEY TOWNSHIP, NJ 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Beachwood/Berkeley Wells site lies in the New Jersey Pinelands area. It consists of reserved, protected, and preserved lands in Berkeley Township and Beachwood Borough. Naturally corrosive water leached lead from residential plumbing, resulting in high lead levels. The aquifer was the major drinking water source for area residents. In 1982, the Ocean County Health Department closed private wells with elevated lead levels and provided bottled water for affected residents. Affected homes were connected to the public water supply system in late 1983. No other cleanup actions were required. EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in January 1992. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Beachwood/Berkeley Wells site lies in the New Jersey Pinelands area, which consists of reserved, protected, and preserved lands in Berkeley Township and Beachwood Borough. In 1982, the Ocean County Health Department closed private wells with elevated lead levels and provided bottled water for affected residents in Beachwood Borough and Berkeley Township. EPA attributed lead contamination at the site to corrosive groundwater acting on lead components in the plumbing systems. EPA was unable to address the problem via the Superfund program since the contamination was due to natural conditions. Thus, EPA recommended no further cleanup action and the State took over responsibility for the site. In 1982, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection issued Beachwood Borough an Administrative Order (AO) requiring the extension of the public water supply system to all borough homes east of the Garden State Parkway. In addition, the AO required all homes in the borough to be connected to the public water supply system. Construction of the water system expansion finished in late 1983. As of 1982, County health officials closed 128 residential wells served by the Cohansey Aquifer due to excessive levels of lead. This aquifer is the major source of drinking water for area residents. The source of the contamination was unknown; however, it was suspected that naturally corrosive water was leaching lead from residential plumbing. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) immediately ordered Beachwood Borough to extend its public water supply to all homes within the Borough east of the Garden State Parkway and required all homes in that area to hook up to it. In 1986, EPA investigatedBeachwood homes that were using public water and Berkeley homes that were using well water and found that residential plumbing systems were the primary cause for lead contamination, with a minor contribution from the area's native groundwater. Beachwood Borough is densely populated and located in a suburban setting; whereas Berkeley Township is more rural and not densely populated. Site Responsibility: This site was addressed through Federal, State and local actions. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
This site was addressed through an emergency action. Further investigations showed that no other cleanup actions were required. 
Top of Page