HELEN KRAMER LANDFILLMANTUA TOWNSHIP, NJ 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Helen Kramer Landfill is located in Mantua Township, New Jersey. The site includes a 66-acre refuse area and an 11-acre previously stressed area between the refuse and Edwards Run. The site was originally a sand and gravel pit. It became a landfill between 1963 and 1965 where several types of wastes were deposited, including municipal wastes, septage, hospital wastes and industrial wastes. Large volumes of wastes were deposited just north of the south ravine in 1963. Ponds of standing liquid were located around the north ravine. Between 1963 and 1965, the fill was extended into the south ravine, and the north ravine was filled and graded. Very little is known about landfill activities between 1965 and 1970. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) issued a temporary one-year registration to the site operator, Mr. Marvin Jonas in 1970 to submit a sanitary landfill design required for permanent registration. Several months before the deadline, Mr. Jonas informed NJDEP that Mrs. Helen Kramer, owner of the property on which the landfill is located, was responsible for landfill operations. The required landfill design was not submitted until July 1973, and both it and subsequent revisions submitted in January and March 1974 were determined to be incomplete by NJDEP. NJDEP inspections in October 1973 noted that trenches were being dug up and used for the disposal of chemical waste. A 20-foot by 6-foot area of chemical waste was noted, as was the disposal of septic waste. Area residents alleged that sporadic chemical dumping continued between 1974 to 1981. NJDEP files and other reports indicate materials containing hazardous substances were also disposed of at the landfill during that period. The county court ordered the landfill to stop operations in March 1981. The premise for the court-ordered closure was that the landfill had exceeded its permitted elevations and capacity. At that point, the groundwater had become contaminated with hazardous chemicals.  During the summer and fall of 1981, several fires broke out at the landfill. NJDEP, with the assistance of the local fire department, extinguished all fires by November 1981. Following additional investigations, EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1983. The site's long-term operation and maintenance activities following the cleanup are ongoing.  Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The major components of the cleanup plan included: (1) constructing a multi-layer cap over the site; (2) cleaning on-site lagoons; (3) constructing a slurry wall to surround the entire site; (4) constructing a groundwater/leachate collection trench to prevent leachate from entering Edwards Run; (5) pretreating leachate from the collection trench before its discharged to the Gloucester County Utilities Authority; (6) constructing an active gas collection and treatment system; and (7) implementing surface water controls. Construction activities were completed in 1993. The U.S. sued potentially responsible parties (PRPs) for reimbursement of costs incurred. The case was settled in the summer of 1998. The PRPs agreed to reimburse the U.S. $95 million plus interest for past costs. Remedial operation activities are ongoing. Long-term Operation and Maintenance (O&M) includes: operating the leachate and gas collection systems and the two associated treatment plants, maintaining the cap and the surface water controls, and environmental monitoring. In May 1994, responsibilities for long term O&M at the site were transferred from the federal government to the state of New Jersey. In May 1997, the Settling Parties in the State's cost recovery action started performing the long-term O&M at the site. EPA issued five-year review reports for the site in 2000 and 2005 confirming that the cleanup plan remained protective of human health and the environment. EPA's September 2010 five-year review report indicated that a protectiveness determination of the cleanup plan could not be made until further information was obtained. EPA contacted the Settling Parties in March 2011 for collection of additional data to determine protectiveness. EPA's September 2015 five-year review report indicated that the cleanup plan was protective of human health and the environment.  The five-year review report further indicated that in order for the cleanup plan to be protective in the long-term, an evaluation of the effectiveness of the slurry wall/leachate collection system should be conducted to ensure groundwater migrating towards Edwards Run is effectively contained.  
EPA's September 2020 Five Year Review concluded that the remedies at the site protect human health and the environment in the short-term because all exposure pathways have been addressed. The 2020 Five Year Review concluded that in order for the remedy to be protective in the long-term, additional leachate pumping/system optimization is needed to maintain an inward gradient inside the slurry wall; sampling for 1,4-dioxane and PFAS and other site COCs to define the contaminant plumes in the shallow and deep aquifers needs to occur; and monitoring of surface water and sediments should continue. EPA is working to address these recommendations. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA is addressing the site through a long-term cleanup of the entire site.
Operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. Long-term operation and maintenance (O&M) of the cleanup plan includes: operating the leachate and gas collection systems and the two associated treatment plants, maintaining the cap and the surface water controls, and environmental monitoring. NJDEP is responsible for the long-term O&M, which started in May 1994.
Top of Page