Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Cornell-Dubilier Electronics, Inc. (CDE) site is located in South Plainfield, New Jersey and is comprised of a 26-acre property formerly owned by CDE, several adjacent residential, commercial and municipal properties, and the adjoining Bound Brook corridor. The former CDE facility manufactured electronic components between 1936 and 1962. Poor waste handling practices resulted in releases of polychlorinated biphenyls and chlorinated volatile organic compounds (VOCs), primarily trichloroethylene (TCE), which contaminated soil, sediment, and groundwater at the site. The site’s long-term cleanup is ongoing. EPA addressed immediate threats to human health and the environment and is currently using multiple cleanup phases to address long-term threats to human health and the environment.  EPA Removal Actions:  After identifying PCB-contaminated areas at the former CDE  property in March 1997, EPA issued a legal agreement called an administrative order to the current property owner to take the following actions: (1) limit access to areas of known PCB contamination; (2) take necessary actions to limit the movement of contaminants to the Bound Brook through surface water run-off; and (3) pave driveways and parking areas within the former CDE property lines. These actions were mostly completed in fall 1997, with some follow up actions from 1999-2000. EPA cleaned inside residential homes located near the former CDE property in March and April 1998,﻿ where PCBs were found indoors at levels of potential concern. Beginning in 1998, EPA directed several potentially responsible parties (PRPs) to remove and dispose of contaminated soil from fourteen residential properties located near the former CDE property . The immediate cleanup actions, which were required under the first two legal agreements, were completed by January 2000. EPA completed ﻿additional immediate cleanup actions, which were under a third order, in September 2004, when one of the PRPs failed to perform the work. EPA Long-Term Cleanup: EPA has divided the site into phases, or operable units (OUs), due to cleanup complexity and size. The first operable unit (OU1) addressed cleaning up properties near the former CDE property.. EPA addressed cleaning up the former CDE facility in OU2. EPA is cleaning up the contaminated groundwater and sediment in the Bound Brook in both OU3 and OU4. EPA selected a plan in September 2003 to cleanup PCB-contaminated soil and interior dust at residential, commercial, and municipal properties near the former CDE property (OU1). The cleanup required removing, transporting and disposing of PCB-contaminated soil, as well as restoring affected properties. The OU1 cleanup also called for cleaning interior dust at residential, commercial, and municipal properties where PCBs were detected indoors. Using federal and state funds, EPA cleaned up 34 properties generally located south and southwest of the former CDE property by 2014. EPA selected a cleanup plan in September 2004 to cleanup the contamination at the former CDE facility (OU2). The work began with relocating tenants, followed by the demolition of the former CDE facility structures, and the removal of soil from a capacitor disposal area. The soil from the former CDE property was removed, treated, and/or disposed of in 2009. The site was restored, a multi-layered asphalt cap installed, and a storm water conveyance system and detention basin was constructed by September 2015. EPA selected a cleanup plan in September 2012 to address the groundwater contamination at the site (OU3). The cleanup plan included the placing institutional controls for groundwater, long-term monitoring of groundwater and potential vapor intrusion, and incorporated a waiver for the groundwater treatment due to technical impracticability and limitations posed by site conditions. As part of this OU, 52 properties were sampled for vapor intrusion, potentially resulting from site contamination. All of the vapor sampling results were below EPA’s levels of concern and did not warrant additional studies. EPA also identified the potential for contaminated groundwater to discharge to surface water at levels that would pose an unacceptable risk within Bound Brook. Since a study was being conducted on the Bound Brook under OU4, EPA’s OU4 cleanup plan included a decision on the contaminated groundwater discharging to the Bound Brook. The final planned cleanup (OU4) was issued in May 2015, and addresses contamination within the Bound Brook. The Bound Brook passes adjacent to the former CDE property and has been impacted by the former CDE facilities waste disposal practices. Soil has eroded from the former CDE property to the brook, and contaminated groundwater beneath the property discharges to the brook. To determine the nature and extent of contamination within the Bound Brook, a study was conducted on a 10-mile stretch of the Bound Brook starting as far east as the Talmadge Bridge, extending west past the confluence of the Bound Brook and Green Brook and ending approximately one mile downstream from Green Brook. The investigation included sampling sediment, flood plain soil, and groundwater within the Bound Brook corridor, and included sampling surface water and biota (fish and clams). The OU4 cleanup plan consists of four phases. The first phase involved removing and disposing of a capacitor debris area along the eastern bank of the Bound Brook that is adjacent to the former CDE property which has been contributing contamination to the Bound Brook sediments. The second phase addressed the relocation of a 36-inch waterline that transects the former CDE property . Phase three addressed contaminated groundwater that was released into the Bound Brook from the former CDE property and the cleanup called for the capture and treatment of groundwater along the boundary of the former CDE property and the Bound Brook to prevent the release of groundwater contaminants to surface water. The final and fourth phase consists of digging up and removing contaminated sediment and floodplain soil along a three-mile stretch of the Bound Brook including dredging of New Market Pond. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
A fence was constructed to limit access to the former Cornell property, surface water run-off has been controlled, and paving of driveways and parking areas within the former Cornell property have reduced the potential for exposure to off-site migration of hazardous substances. The current former Cornell property owner, under EPA's direction and oversight, has maintained and upgraded these control features since they were installed in 1997. EPA has completed cleanup actions associated with both OU1 (residential and non-residential properties) and OU2 (the former CDE facility ). The groundwater monitoring (OU3) is being implemented over an area of approximately 825 acres; vapor intrusion sampling is also being assessed to ensure no exposures occur in the community. The engineering designs for the Bound Brook (OU4 – phases 1, 2 and 3) were completed in September 2018. Construction of the Groundwater Extraction and Treatment System (GETS) plant associated with the OU4 Phase 3 cleanup plan was completed in early 2020 and is currently operating. The capacitor debris area and waterline relocation plans associated with OU4 Phases 1 and 2 were completed in December 2021. The fourth phase consists of excavation of floodplain soils and
contaminated sediments in the Bound Brook and surrounding floodplain through a series of remedial actions, in separate reaches. Phase 4 has been split into six reaches of the Bound Brook corridor from most upstream and closest to the former CDE facility (reach 1) to furthest downstream (reach 6). The reach 1 cleanup began in December 2022 and is planned for completion in late 2023. The engineering designs for reaches 2, 3 and 4 to remove contaminated sediments from the Bound Brook and its flood plain soil were completed in September 2023. Cleanup actions for reaches 2, 3 and 4 will began in late 2024. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
All short-term, immediate cleanup actions have been completed and no further removal activities are planned. The long-term cleanup actions associated with OU1 and OU2 have been completed. The long-term cleanup actions associated with OU3, specifically groundwater and vapor intrusion monitoring, continue to be implemented. For the OU4 cleanup, actions have been completed for three out of the four phases (capacitor debris area, waterline relocation and groundwater capture) with the remaining phase, sediment removal from the Bound Brook and soil removal from the Bound Brook flood plain, to follow. Cleanup action (construction of the groundwater containment system) was completed in March 2020 and is currently operational. The capacitor debris area and waterline relocation cleanup actions were completed in December 2021. The engineering design for the first reach of OU4 Phase 4 was completed in December 2021 and cleanup action on this reach began in December 2022.  The engineering designs for reaches 2, 3 and 4 to remove contaminated sediments from the Bound Brook and its flood plain soil were completed in September 2023. Cleanup actions for reaches 2,3 and 4 will began in late 2024. EPA will safely dispose of soil and sediment contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) found along the Bound Brook and the surrounding areas. EPA will divert surface water, dig up the PCB-containing floodplain soil and Bound Brook sediment, and dredge New Market Pond. Top of Page