Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Lower Hackensack River Superfund site includes the lower portion of the Hackensack River, which spans approximately 22 river miles from south of the Oradell Dam to near Newark Bay and is located within Bergen and Hudson counties in New Jersey. The lower portion of the river is tidal, and the Hackensack River estuary receives tidal flows of brackish water from Newark Bay. The Lower Hackensack River, associated wetlands, and surrounding area have been a center of industrial activity for more than 200 years. Decades of sewerage and industrial discharges into the river and its tributaries have contaminated river sediment.These discharges have contaminated site surface waters and sediment with hazardous substances, including with metals (arsenic, chromium, lead, and mercury), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, or PAHs, polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCBs, and 2,3,7,8- tetrachlorodibenzodioxin, or 2,3,7,8-TCDD. In 2015, the EPA conducted a Preliminary Assessment for the site that incorporated a review of available analytical results reported from samples collected and maintained by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In 2016 and again in 2021, the EPA extensively sampled the river bottom at differing depths and determined the presence of hazardous substances, including arsenic, cadmium, chromium, dieldrin, lead, mercury, and several PAHs in surface and subsurface sediment at concentrations significantly greater than background concentrations. The EPA’s review of historic sampling indicated that site sediment also contain elevated concentrations of PCBs and 2,3,7,8-TCDD. The EPA added the Lower Hackensack River Superfund site, located in Bergen and Hudson counties, New Jersey, to the Superfund program’s National Priorities List, or NPL, in September 2022. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
At this time, the ﻿EPA is addressing this site in two distinct areas called operable units: the area of the Lower Hackensack River from south of the Oradell Dam to near Newark Bay at River Mile 1, which spans approximately 22 river miles, is being addressed under Operable Unit 1, or OU1, and the area of the Lower Hackensack River generally located between River Mile 2 and 5.5 is being addressed under Operable Unit 2, or OU2. On October 3, 2024, the EPA and Beazer East, Inc., Honeywell International Inc., Morton International, LLC, Occidental Chemical Corporation, and Public Service Electric and Gas Company entered into a settlement agreement to investigate contamination in a portion of the Lower Hackensack River referred to as OU2, located between river miles 2 and 5.5, near Kearny and Jersey City, in Hudson county, New Jersey. The EPA’s review of existing data has identified concentrations of mercury, chromium, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. or PAHs, polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCBs, and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin, or 2,3,7,8-TCDD, as well as the presence of non-aqueous phase liquids, in OU2. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The EPA added the Lower Hackensack River Superfund site to the Superfund program's National Priorities List on September 9, 2022 On October 3, 2024, the EPA and Beazer East, Inc., Honeywell International Inc., Morton International, LLC, Occidental Chemical Corporation, and Public Service Electric and Gas Company entered into a settlement agreement to investigate contamination in a portion of the Lower Hackensack River referred to as OU2, located between river miles 2 and 5.5, near Kearny and Jersey City, in Hudson county, New Jersey. The investigation required under the settlement agreement will evaluate whether contaminated sediment in OU2 act as sources of contamination to the rest of the Lower Hackensack River, which may pose an unacceptable risk to people's health and the environment due to the presence of contaminants that persist in the environment and can build up in fish and shellfish. The settlement agreement also requires sampling throughout the Lower Hackensack River to understand the river’s baseline conditions. Top of Page