GRANTS CHLORINATED SOLVENTSGRANTS, NM
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Grants Chlorinated Solvents site is located in Grants, Cibola County, New Mexico. The site consists of a 20-acre, 100-foot-deep groundwater plume that extends about 1,000 feet from the source. An operating dry cleaning facility, no longer a source is the primary source of contamination. The primary chemicals contaminating groundwater include tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and its degradation products. Following remedy construction, operation and maintenance activities and groundwater monitoring are ongoing.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The New Mexico Environment Department is the lead agency to conduct operations and maintenance of the cleanup remedies at the Site. The cleanup remedies at the site include:  1) destruction of contaminants in soil using extreme heat at the high concentration source area in a process called in-situ thermal treatment, which is now completed, 2)  ongoing injections of emulsified vegetable oil with nutrients mixed with water into groundwater, a process called in-situ enhanced bioremediation, to breakdown groundwater contaminants, and 3) the completed installation of vapor intrusion mitigation systems (VIMS) at 15 buildings to prevent Superfund Site related contamination into indoor air. EPA has conducted five-year reviews at the site. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. The Holiday Cleaners facility at 705 First Street is the primary source for the chlorinated solvent contamination at the site. Holiday Cleaners has operated as a dry cleaning business since 1969 under various owners. Most of the releases of chlorinated solvents occurred prior to 1988 when new equipment was installed. According to the current owner, releases at this source area are attributed to leaks from the old cleaning equipment and from delivery and overfill spills of the storage container in the rear of the building. The old equipment was removed from service and upgraded. The PCE storage tank is no longer in use. An abandoned dry cleaner facility at 605 First Street is a secondary source of chlorinated solvents. A dry cleaning facility operated at this location from 1976 to 1977.

What Is the Current Site Status?
This site is one of many across the country to receive funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which invested $3.5 billion in environmental remediation at Superfund sites on the National Priorities List. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding will be used to optimize enhanced reductive dechlorination for groundwater restoration, as well as vapor intrusion mitigation operations and maintance to remove indoor air contaminants from buildings. The site’s long-term remedy, selected in 2006, included vapor intrusion mitigation, thermal and chemical dechlorination technologies to address shallow and deep groundwater contamination, and institutional controls. EPA updated the remedy in 2011 to eliminate thermal treatment at the secondary source area due to low contaminant levels and to expand thermal treatment downgradient of the primary source into the shallow plume core. Enhanced reductive dechlorination also replaced the deep thermal treatment (from 40 to 80 feet below ground surface) in the primary source area. Remedy construction finished in September 2012. The thermal remedy treated about 33,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil. Operation and maintenance activities and groundwater monitoring are ongoing. EPA completed the third five-year review of the long-term remedy in 2024.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Permitting and drilling of new wells within the affected area is prohibited.

Sampling and Monitoring
Groundwater sampling data is collected annually and can be found in the Annual Long-Term Response Action Report found at the website: 2022 Long Term Response Action Report
.
