Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
 The Prewitt Abandoned Refinery is a former crude oil refinery located on approximately 70 acres near the town of Prewitt in McKinley County, New Mexico. The Site is located approximately 20 miles northwest of Grants, New Mexico. The Site is bounded on the south by Interstate 40, and on the north by the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe (AT&SF) Railroad. New Mexico Highway 122 (former U. S. Highway 66) divides the Site into two tracts. The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. The two Site tracts are jointly owned by Atlantic Richfield Company (AR) now part of British Petroleum (BP) and El Paso Natural Gas Company (EPNG). AR and EPNG are the PRPs for the site. The refinery was in operation between 1938 and 1957. In July 1957, the refinery was shut down and the refinery and accompanying structures were subsequently dismantled. Remnants and debris remained after the refinery was dismantled, including piping, waste pits, a separator structure, and other structural material. The Site was covered with scattered demolished structures and foundations, sparse desert vegetation, and exposed fill. The contaminants of concern in the groundwater were benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylenes (BTEX); and lead. The contaminants in the soil were asbestos, lead and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons. The remedial actions for surface media were excavation and off-site disposal of asbestos-containing materials, lead-contaminated soil, and separator contents, and removal and disposal of Separator structures. The remedial actions for the subsurface media were Soil Vapor Extraction (SVE) of non-aqueous phase liquids (NAPL), contaminated groundwater migration control, and groundwater remediation by extraction, treatment and re-injection. The surface portion of the Site has been remediated and is available for reuse but is currently only used solely for remedial activities. A fence restricts access to the Site. The Phase II Subsurface Remedy for the E-Sandstone Unit consisted of batch injection of nutrients, initially at six wells, to enhance in situ biodegradation of BTEX constituents in groundwater using a nutrient injection system constructed within an enclosed trailer. The remedy also included continued groundwater extraction at remediation wells as necessary to support in situ bioremediation and to maintain containment of the leading edge plume in the E-Sandstone Unit. The site is located in a rural area. About 50 to 75 people live within a one-mile radius of the site. Directly east of the north portion of the site, there are two occupied homes. Previously there were six homes, but the PRPs purchased four of the properties and tore down the homes after the residents relocated. Groundwater from the Sonsela Sandstone Units in the area of the site is used by two residences directly east of the north end of the site. The Navajo Nation, Baca Chapter had a well located west of the old refinery area, which was plugged and abandoned by the PRPS. A new well wasdrilled near the Chapter House for their use, however, the well was never put into operation The site was proposed on the National Priority Listing (NPL) on June 24, 1998. The NPL Final Listing Date was August 30, 1990. The ROD for the Site was signed on September 30, 1992. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
 EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy for surface media is complete and continues to be protective of human health and the environment. The remedy for subsurface media continues to be protective in the short term; however, a long-term determination could not be made. The review raises concerns about the enforceability of existing deed restrictions under the laws of the State of New Mexico. Additionally, the review recommends new evaluations to characterize the quantity, composition and extent of various contaminants and exposure pathways at the site. The review recommends the evaluation of an alternative cleanup plan to enhance protectiveness at the site. Principal Pollutants: 
Soil: Asbestos, lead and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
Other: Petroleum sludges
Ground Water: Lead, benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylenes. 
Volumes: 
Recovered approximately 5,600 gallons NAPL by liquid recovery
Removed over 520,000 lbs of (approximately 80,000 gallons) volatile hydrocarbons (NAPL), including about 21,000 lbs of BTEX by SVE
Removed approximately 800 cubic yards of asbestos containing materials
Removed approximately 3000 cubic yards of PAH contaminated soils
Removed approximately 1900 cubic yards of lead contaminated soils
Removed approximately 83 cubic yards of sludges in the separator 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy for surface media included excavation and off-site disposal of asbestos-containing materials, lead-contaminated soil and separator contents, and removal and disposal of the separator structure. The site’s long-term remedy for the subsurface media included soil vapor extraction, contaminated groundwater migration control, groundwater remediation by extraction, treatment and re-injection, and use of a nutrient injection system to enhance in-place biodegradation. The remedy for the surface media is complete. Subsurface media may require additional cleanup. A Technical Memorandum of the Remedy Optimization Review was completed in August 2019 to evaluate the status of the groundwater remediation efforts. AR and EPNG requested this independent optimization review. The specific objectives for the review included: 
Assessing whether the subsurface remedy selected in the record of decision (ROD) (EPA 1992) and developed in the Remedial Design Report (ERM-Rocky Mountain, Inc. and AHA, 1994) was implemented, optimized and operated to achieve the remedial action objectives (RAO) to the extent practicable for the specified technologies; and
Providing recommendations for an updated remedial strategy and related technical modifications to make further progress toward site completion. 
Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
The surface portion of the Site has been remediated to allow for future residential use but is currently only used solely for remedial activities. The surface portion has been deleted from the NPL. A fence restricts access to the Site.
Top of Page