NEW CASSEL/HICKSVILLE GROUND WATER CONTAMINATIONNEW CASSEL/HICKSVILLE, NY 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The New Cassel/Hicksville Ground Water Contamination site is an area of widespread groundwater contamination in the towns of North Hempstead, Hempstead, and Oyster Bay in Nassau County, New York. EPA sampling in 2010 found contaminants in the pre-treated water from four Town of Hempstead wells, six Hamlet of Hicksville wells, and one Village of Westbury well. The primary groundwater contaminants observed at the site included tetrachloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE) and other volatile organic compounds (VOCs). VOCs are contaminants that evaporate easily into the air and dissolve in water. VOCs are often used as ingredients in paints, solvents, aerosol sprays, cleaners, disinfectants, automotive products, and drycleaning fluids. Past industrial and commercial activities in the area have contributed to the groundwater contamination at the site, which is a source of drinking water. Consistent with the Safe Drinking Water Act that protects public drinking water supplies throughout the nation, the local water utilities monitor water quality regularly and have previously installed treatment systems to remove VOCs from groundwater. As a result of investigations conducted beginning 1988 and continuing to 2010, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) identified several sources of the contamination. NYSDEC requested in 2010 that EPA list the site on the Superfund Program’s National Priorities List (NPL). EPA listed the site on the NPL in September 2011. EPA is addressing the site in three discrete phases or components known as operable units or OUs. After the site’s NPL listing, EPA evaluated site data to determine the nature and extent of contamination and evaluate cleanup alternatives. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Residents of the Hempstead, Hicksville, and Westbury areas receive drinking water from public water supplies that have treatment systems installed so that the drinking water meets state standards.  Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Operable Unit 1:  As part of the investigation of the groundwater south of Old Country Road, or Operable Unit 1 (OU1), EPA is drilling groundwater monitoring wells. This work will be completed by the end of 2022. EPA will also collect additional data to support the engineering design needed. EPA expects that the parties responsible for the contamination, also known as potentially responsible parties (PRPs) will conduct or pay for the engineering design work and ultimately cleanup the site. There are three groundwater plumes, or areas where contaminants disperse, within OU1 – Eastern, Central and Western. EPA is overseeing the work of the PRPs responsible for the Eastern and Central plumes and is directly investigating the Western plume.  Operable Unit 2 incudes groundwater contamination coming from Sylvania Properties and General Instruments facility. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) is examining the nature and extent of contamination at a portion of OU2 and options for addressing the contamination. This work, called the remedial investigation (RI), is being done under the Formerly Utilized Sites Remedial Action Program for cleaning up sites with contamination resulting from the nation’s early atomic energy program. The USACE completed the RI report for groundwater contamination coming from the Sylvania Properties in September 2021. EPA is working with another PRP to obtain additional information in order to finalize a comprehensive RI report for OU2. After the investigation is complete, EPA will seek public comment on a proposed cleanup plan. Operable Unit 3 incudes the underlying aquifers. EPA is currently investigating these aquifers in phases to determine the nature and extent of groundwater contamination. Beginning in 2017 in the Salisbury area in and around the Eisenhower Park Golf Course, EPA installed permanent aquifer monitoring wells up to a maximum depth of approximately 600 feet below to collect samples at multiple depths, document hydrogeological conditions, and assess the extent of VOC contamination. EPA collected groundwater samples from the existing and newly installed monitoring wells to test for VOCs, semi-volatile organic compounds, pesticides, and metals analysis. The results of the analyses assisted in the characterization (i.e., nature and extent) of the impacted groundwater and will help plan the next steps of the investigation. Following the OU3 investigation, EPA prepared an RI report to document the investigation activities and results. A separate Feasibility Study (FS) report was also prepared to present cleanup alternatives that may be implemented to address the impacted groundwater. EPA issued a cleanup plan for public comment which identifies EPA’s preferred method of cleanup. Top of Page