Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) site is a research and development facility owned by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). It covers 5,265 acres or approximately 8 square miles, in Upton, New York. The Army used the site as Camp Upton during World Wars I and II. Since 1947, BNL has been operated by contractors first to the Atomic Energy Commission and now to the DOE, the site owners. Since March 1998, Brookhaven Science Associates has operated BNL for the DOE. BNL conducts basic and applied research in high energy nuclear and solid state physics, fundamental material and structure properties and the interaction of matter, nuclear medicine, biomedical and environmental sciences, and selected energy technologies. To conduct this research BNL designs, builds, and runs installations for scientific research, such as particle accelerators and nuclear reactors. Most of its main facilities comprise an area of approximately 900 acres near the center of the site. Outlying facilities cover about 550 acres and include the hazardous waste management facility (HWMF), agricultural research fields, landfill areas, and a sewage treatment plant. The remainder of the facility is largely wooded. BNL lies over groundwater that is designated as a sole source aquifer. BNL, the Suffolk County Water Authority, and private well users draw drinking water within 3 miles of the facility. Recently, about 1600 users of private wells south of BNL have been connected to public water. The headwaters of the Peconic River are on BNL property in a freshwater wetland upgradient of the known areas of concern. Surface water within 3 miles downstream of the site is used for recreation. Environmental contamination at the lab has resulted from accidental spills and historical storage and disposal of chemical and radiological materials.The DOE, the EPA and the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) have negotiated an Interagency Agreement to investigate and clean up environmental problems at BNL, which became effective in May 1992. Many cleanup activities have been completed; other cleanup efforts are ongoing. To streamline cleanup efforts, the site is divided into Operable Units (OUs) which are described in depth below.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The DOE, EPA and DEC have studied the site and identified 34 Areas of Concern (AOCs). The agencies have grouped these AOCs into operable units as described below, and DOE has made environmental progress by planning and completing the following remedial actions at each Operable Unit. To date, nine Records of Decision (RODs) have been signed. An OU to address per- and polyfluoroalkylated substances (PFAS) and 1,4-dioxane (OU VIII) is forthcoming. OU I: Radiologically contaminated soils on the BNL site. The former hazardous waste management facility (FHWMF) within this operable unit contained extensive radiological soil contamination. A cleanup proposal was presented to the public in the Spring of 1999. The DOE, EPA selected a final remedy in a ROD, with NYSDEC concurrence, in September 1999. The remedy requires excavation and off-site disposal of the contaminated soil, wetlands restoration, monitoring and site use controls. Remedial action work began in 2002 and finished in 2005. In December 2013, the FHWMF perimeter soils was included as a sub-area of concern and is included under Operable Unit I. These soils were remediated in September 2014. Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) groundwater contamination on BNL property associated with the Current Landfill and FHWMF is documented under the OU I ROD. OU II: Brookhaven Graphite Research Reactor (BGRR) Areas/Alternating Gradient Synchrotron (AGS) Scrapyard: This operable unit addresses scattered areas of radiologically contaminated soil throughout the site. The remedial investigation finished in late 1996. To select a consistent remedy for all radiologically contaminated soil, the final remedy was evaluated and selected with Operable Unit I. The DOE started the design of this remedy in the spring of 2000. Remedial action has been completed. The Brookhaven Graphite Research Reactor itself is addressed under another operable unit and ROD (see below). OU III: ﻿Site-wide Groundwater: This operable unit addresses extensive groundwater contamination throughout the site. On and off-site VOC groundwater contamination was discovered during the investigation. Removal actions have been taken to prevent further contaminant movement and protect the public. The tritium plume from the High Flux Beam Reactor has been added to this operable unit. Plumes of strontium-90 contamination from the old reactors and waste disposal units are also addressed in this operable unit. The remedy selected in the June 2000 ROD consists of various pump-and-treat systems (for the VOC, tritium and strontium plumes) with some off-site disposal of highly tritiated water at the High Flux Beam Reactor. The remedy also incorporates several ongoing removal actions. Remedial designs for the groundwater remedies began in October 2000. Predesign characterization and/or pilot studies started in August 2001. The systems are all in place and operating. In May 2005, site agencies issued an Explanation of Significant Differences, or ESD to the Operable Unit III ROD, to allow for the time and resources needed to remediate strontium in the groundwater. Annual groundwater reports summarize each of the groundwater systems and, where necessary, recommend modifications. Operable Unit IV: Central Steam Facility. This operable unit addresses soil and groundwater in the central part of the site contaminated with VOCs from a ruptured tank. The remedial investigation and feasibility study are complete. The DOE issued a Proposed Remedial Action Plan in December 1995. The ROD selecting the remedy was signed in March 1996. The DOE is using air sparging and soil vapor extraction to clean up VOCs in soil and groundwater. The system is in place; it started operating in the fall of 1997. During the investigation, the DOE removed about 1,400 tons of contaminated soil and disposed of it off site. OU V: Peconic River/Sewage Treatment Plant: This operable unit addresses contaminated sediments in the Peconic River and the sewage treatment plant. However, because of scheduling differences between the two sites, they were separated. The sediments in the Peconic River were known to be contaminated with mercury, silver, PCBs and low levels of radionuclides such as cesium-137. Samples were taken in the Peconic River on site and all the way down the river to the Peconic Bay to assess radiological contaminants. The operable unit’s January 2005 ROD selected excavation of sediments from the river as the remedy. A January 2002 ROD approved excavation for the sewage treatment plant. Remedial action for both these sites has been completed. Since December, 2014, 140 sediment samples were collected at the Peconic River as a follow-up to elevated mercury concentrations identified in the area during ongoing long term monitoring activities.  Discussions are ongoing between EPA, DOE and NYDEC as to what the next steps and path forward will be regarding these elevated levels of mercury. OU VI: Upland Recharge Area: Agricultural testing at the site resulted in groundwater contamination with ethylene dibromide (EDB). In the fall of 1996, the DOE proposed an alternative approach to cleaning it up. As a precautionary measure, the DOE connected residences in the area where groundwater contamination is expected to move off site to the public water system. No one is currently drinking contaminated water. More data has been gathered since 1996 and a final remedy was selected in March 2001. Construction of the system is complete and the system is operating. OU VII: Radiologically contaminated soils on BNL property such as Cs-137 identified as part of aerial radiological surveys. The AOCs in this OU were documented under the OU I and III RODs (except for BLIP [AOC 16K], which was documented in the g-2/BLIP/USTs ROD (BNL 2007b). Brookhaven Graphite Research Reactor (BGRR): Cleanup of the reactor has taken place in stages. Removals have addressed various components (e.g., air cooling fans, aboveground ducts, the canal and water treatment house, exhaust cooling coils and filters, primary liners, and various subsurface contaminated soils). Work on the BGRR (e.g., removal of the graphite pile, biological shield) has been completed. A close-out report has been issued for the engineered cap and the monitoring system installation. Dismantling of the reactor finished in June 2012. g-2 Experiment area, BLIP facility, and Underground Storage Tanks: Particle accelerator operations at the former g-2 experiment area (AOC 16T) and BLIP facility (AOC 16K) have resulted in the activation of soil used for shielding. The primary contaminants of concern in the activated soils are tritium and sodium-22. The infiltration of rainwater through the activated soils can leach tritium and sodium-22 from the soils and carry them into the groundwater. To reduce the ability of rainwater to infiltrate the activated soils, a number of stormwater management controls have been implemented. In addition, eight USTs from several locations across the site were removed between 1988 and 1996, and confirmatory soil sampling following the tank removals indicated no environmental impacts. High Flux Beam Reactor (HFBR): The ROD was approved in April 2009. Since then, the control rod blades were removed and the other equipment has been removed. Underground utilities and associated soils have been removed. The dismantling of Building 802 (Fan House) has been completed and a close-out report was issued. The stack removal was completed in 2021, and a closeout report is currently under review. Cleanup Achievements:  PCB-contaminated Soil: In the summer of 1992, about 260 cubic yards (162 tons) of PCB- and oil-contaminated soil was dug up and disposed of off-site. This eliminated potential exposure to on-site workers and movement of the contamination to groundwater. Mercury-contaminated Soil: In the spring of 1993, about 252 tons of mercury-contaminated soil were dug up, treated and disposed of off-site. This eliminated potential exposure to on-site workers and movement of the contaminants in the environment. Operable Unit IV: In the spring of 1994, about 1,400 tons of visibly contaminated soils containing oil and solvents were removed and disposed of off-site. Construction of the soil vapor extraction/air sparging system selected in a March 1996 ROD finished in November 1997. The system is operating to remove VOCs from soil and groundwater. Cesspools: Since the spring of 1994, 25 contaminated cesspools and their contents have been removed and disposed of off-site. This has eliminated potential sources of groundwater contamination. Current Landfill: During the summer and fall of 1995, this 8-acre area was covered with a low permeability cap. This eliminated a source of groundwater contamination. Former Landfill Area: During the summer and fall of 1996, this 12-acre area was covered with a low permeability cap. This eliminated a source of groundwater contamination. VOC and Strontium-contaminated Groundwater: Eleven groundwater pump-and-treat systems are in operation, continually moving VOCs and strontium from the groundwater. Over 7,300 pounds of VOCs and 30 millicuries of strontium have been removed. About 105 million gallons of contaminated groundwater are treated each month. Tritium-contaminated Groundwater: Since May 1997, a groundwater extraction and reinjection system has managed about 334 million gallons of tritium-contaminated groundwater, providing hydraulic containment. In December 1997, the source of the groundwater contamination, the spent fuel pool at the High Flux Beam Reactor, was drained of about 65,000 gallons of radiologically contaminated water. Interim Landfill: During the summer and fall of 1997, this 1-acre area was covered with a low permeability cap. This eliminated a potential source of groundwater contamination. Chemical/Animal Pits and Glass Holes: During the summer and fall of 1997, about 20,800 tons (13,000 cubic yards) of contaminated soil and laboratory debris were dug up from about 55 disposal holes and prepared for eventual off-site disposal. Contaminants include pesticides, metals and radionuclides. This has eliminated sources of groundwater contamination and removed highly contaminated material for off-site disposal. Carbon Tetrachloride Tank and Groundwater: In the fall of 1998, a tank that contained residues of carbon tetrachloride was removed and disposed of off-site. Groundwater nearby is highly contaminated because of releases from the tank. Pumping of the contaminated groundwater started in February 1999. About 155 million gallons of contaminated water have been treated, removing about 350 pounds of carbon tetrachloride. The system has met the cleanup goals and has been dismantled. Peconic River: During phase 1 excavation, about 12,988 cubic yards of sediment was removed, mostly from on-site areas. The phase 2 excavation removed about 8,200 cubic yards of sediment from off-site areas (e.g., upstream and downstream of Manor Road). The excavation removed mercury contamination and other contaminants such as silver, copper and PCBs. With the excavation complete, the river was monitored to make sure the actions taken remain protective. During annual sampling of the river from 2011-2015, elevated mercury levels were again found in the sediment. A plan is currently being put together to address the areas in which the elevated mercury levels were located.  Supplemental sediment removal occurred in 2017. Several additional remedy optimizations have beenaccomplished. These include the addition of extraction wells associated with the Middle Road, OU III South Boundary, and Industrial Park groundwater treatment systems. These extraction wells were added to allow for the capture and treatment of the deeper VOC contamination identified. A new groundwater treatment system was added near the Building 96 treatment system in 2012 to capture and treat a plume of Freon-11 associated with Building 452. This system successfully remediated the plume and was shut down in March 2016. In 2013, the Former Hazardous Waste Management Facility (HWMF) Perimeter Soils were designated as Sub-Area of Concern 1J. The final phase of radiological soil cleanup at this area was completed in 2014. From 2014 through 2016, the former Waste Concentration Facility Buildings 810 and 811 were demolished, waste transfer lines were removed, and excavation of radiologically contaminated soil was completed. This action is expected to further reduce Sr-90 contamination in the soil, thus helping to meet the groundwater cleanup objective. OU X: PFAS and 1,4 Dioxane are being treated via Time Critical Removal Action which lead to the installation of treatment systems that use Granular Activated Carbon filters. As of the Spring of 2024, BNL is in the planning stage to further investigate PFAS and 1,4 dioxane.
What Is the Current Site Status?
In 2018, an area of radiologically contaminated soil was removed from OU I. The capture goal for the VOC plume was also accomplished by the OU I South Boundary treatment system, and the system was approved for closure in 2019. Post-closure monitoring indicates total VOC concentrations are below the cleanup goals. During 2019-2020, new wells have been installed to track other areas of the plume. Groundwater quality continues to improve. For OU III, the well network continues to be refined, with some closures and well additions. Monitoring continues for the OU IV Sr-90 plume, and temporary wells continue to track the plume. In OU V, additional sediment was removed from a small area of the Peconic River. For OU VI, the EDB plume treatment network continues to operate, and deeper contamination is being addressed. During 2021, the HFBR stack demolition was completed. Additionally, BNL has created a new OU to address per- and polyfluoroalkylated substances. All operable units are considered protective of human health and the environment, with the following designated as protective in the short term, with further recommendations provided for achieving long term protectiveness.
Operable Unit III: While exposures are under control, groundwater cleanup goals have not yet been attained. BNL is continuing to monitor the movement and remediation of the plumes, and long-term protectiveness will be verified by the results of this continued monitoring. The recommendations for this OU include continued monitoring of treatment systems and groundwater plume conditions. Operable Unit V: A need was identified in the Five Year Review for completing vegetation sampling, and a request has been made by New York State Department of Environmental Conservation to sample fish in the Peconic River for mercury and PCBs. Recommendations for this OU include the sampling of vegetation and fish tissue. Details of the sampling plan will be documented in an updated Peconic River Fish Surveillance Monitoring Data Quality Objective, and the protectiveness of the OUV remedy will be reevaluated based on this data. Operable Unit VI: While exposures are under control, groundwater cleanup goals have not yet been attained. BNL is continuing to monitor groundwater plume conditions, movement and remediation, and long-term protectiveness will be verified by the results of this continued monitoring. The recommendations for this OU include continued monitoring of treatment systems and groundwater plume conditions. OU IX - High Flux Beam Reactor: This OU has a designation of short-term protective because the demolition of the stack was still in progress at the time of the Five Year Review. The demolition and site remediation has since been completed and a Closeout Report was submitted to regulators for review in the fall of 2021. OU X - PFAS and 1,4-Dioxane: ﻿A new OU has been created to address emerging contaminants per- and polyfluoroalkylated substances and 1,4-dioxane. Further work is needed to delineate PFAS contamination and address sources. The Remedial Investigation is expected to occur in 2024-2025.


Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are administered as per the BNL Land Use Controls Management Plan (LUCMP) (BNL 2013a) which was initially issued in 2003. LUICs will be maintained for as long as necessary in order to ensure performance of the completed remedies as described and documented in the BNL RODs. The AOC-specific institutional controls are documented on fact sheets stored on the BNL LUIC website (secure and not available to the public.) Planning for any work at the site that may potentially disturb a formerly remediated area requires a review of the website. ICs are deployed at BNL to prevent exposure to residual environmental contamination and to ensure the long-term effectiveness of the remedies.
