Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Wolff-Alport Chemical Company Superfund site includes 1125 to 1139 Irving Avenue and 1514 Cooper Avenue in Ridgewood, Queens, New York, which borders Bushwick, Brooklyn, New York. EPA included the adjacent streets, sidewalks, sewers, and commercial and residential properties where radiological contaminants migrated or have the potential to migrate as part of the site. This nearly triangular area covers approximately 0.75 acres and is bound by Irving Avenue to the southwest, Cooper Avenue to the northwest, and a former cabinet manufacturing facility to the east. The on-site buildings contain a delicatessen/grocery, office space, residential apartments, several auto-repair shops, and warehousing space. A strip of unpaved land located behind the other on-site properties is the home of a former rail spur, which is currently used to store automobiles. The Wolff-Alport Chemical Company imported monazite sand and extracted rare earth metals onsite from the early 1920s until 1954. Monazite contains approximately 6-8% thorium. Until 1947, the Wolff-Alport Chemical Company dumped the thorium waste in the sewer and possibly buried the waste on the property. EPA investigations have confirmed that contamination still exists on the property and in or around the sewer lines downstream of the former facility. The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) first notified the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (NYCDOHMH), New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of the potential for radiological contamination at the site in 1987. EPA and NYCDOHMH conducted a preliminary radiological survey in 1988, which confirmed that radiological contamination was below the regulatory limits at the time. As part of a 2007 radiation assessment in New York City, NYC DOHMH identified the former Wolff-Alport site as having levels above the typical background levels in NYC. Then, using funds from EPA’s Brownfields program, the New York City Department of Design and Construction (NYCDDC) investigated the site between 2009 and 2010 and found radiological contamination on the former facility property and in the sewer system adjacent to the property. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) completed a health consultation in 2012 and concluded there were potential health risks to on-site workers and pedestrians who frequently use the sidewalks of Irving Avenue near the site due to the radiological contamination.  As a result, EPA added the site to the National Priorities List (NPL) in 2014.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
After extensive sampling, EPA took steps to protect people working or living near the Wolff-Alport Chemical Company site in the short-term. EPA installed concrete, lead, and steel shielding inside three of the on-property buildings and over the adjacent Irving Avenue sidewalk between 2012 and 2014. EPA placed a layer of crushed rock as shielding over the former railroad spur portion of the site. The agency also installed a mitigation system to reduce radon in one of the on-property buildings where the levels were high. By taking radiation measurements of the surrounding area, EPA, the New York State Department of Health, and the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene found that there was no exposure to the surrounding community from radiation located on-site. EPA investigated the site to determine the nature and extent of contamination, perform a human health risk assessment, and identify and evaluate cleanup alternatives. As part of the investigation, EPA measured radiation at the site, installed groundwater monitoring wells, investigated the adjacent sewer system, sampled sediment from Newtown Creek near the combined sewer outfall, and tested for radon at a nearby school and daycare center. The investigation determined that no further actions were necessary at either the school or daycare center, but further measures would be needed at several areas of the site. EPA repaired the steel shielding on the sidewalk along Irving Avenue in 2021 to prevent the risk of a slip and fall. Although EPA took immediate actions at the site to protect the commercial and residential tenants in the short-term, based on the results of a human health risk assessment, EPA found that additional actions were needed to fully protect people in the long-term from exposure to the radiologically-contaminated buildings and radiologically-contaminated soil. EPA finalized a cleanup plan, documented in a Record of Decision in 2017. The plan calls for the permanent relocation of the tenants on the former facility property, demolition of the former facility buildings, digging up and removing contaminated soil and sewer sediment, jet cleaning the sewer system, and disposing all contaminated soil, sediment, and building materials at off-site facilities.
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA completed the engineering design for the building demolition in 2018 but could not start the work until the buildings’ tenants were relocated. Between 2017 and 2022, EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which performs tenant relocations on behalf of EPA, engaged the on-property owners and tenants on multiple occasions to seek the tenants’ cooperation in completing the forms necessary to determine their eligibility for relocation assistance benefits. In March 2022, EPA issued access orders to several uncooperative parties. After many parties failed to cooperate and comply with the access orders, the United States Department of Justice filed a complaint in federal court in January 2023. A federal judge issued an order requiring the remaining tenants to vacate by August 31, 2023.  By early September 2023, all the buildings had been vacated and EPA’s demolition contractor had secured the buildings. The demolition contractor mobilized on-site in late September 2023. EPA performed a pre-design investigation (PDI) in 2022 and 2023 to further identify the extent of the off-property soil contamination and is now working on finalizing the on-property soil excavation design. New York City, which owns the sewers, streets, and sidewalks, agreed to perform the engineering design for the contaminated sewers and the contaminated soil removal beneath the streets and sidewalks. The PDI related to these areas began in fall 2023. New York City has also agreed to cleanup the contamination in the sewer system and beneath the streets and sidewalks after they complete their design. EPA hosted a community meeting in December 2023 to provide updates on the progress made at the site and the upcoming cleanup work.
