Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Clothier Disposal site, located in the town of Granby, Oswego County, New York, was used to dispose of demolition debris, household wastes, junk vehicles, and hazardous chemical waste. The site is a fifteen-acre, privately-owned parcel of land, of which six acres were used for waste disposal.  In 1973, the Oswego County Health Department found approximately 2,200 drums of chemical waste dumped on the site and requested an investigation by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC).  In 1976, NYSDEC brought suit against the owner of the property for operating an illegal dump.  Subsequently, a temporary permit was granted for a period of one year to clean up the site.  In 1977, the owner made an attempt to bury or cover the waste materials dumped on the site.  In doing so, drums were broken open and drained.  Between early 1978 and 1980, additional efforts were made by the owner to clean up the property.  Again these efforts largely entailed burying or covering previously exposed wastes.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site was addressed through state, federal, and potentially responsible parties' (PRPs') actions in two stages: initial actions and a long-term remedial action focused on cleanup of the entire site. Initial Actions: In 1983, Engineering-Science, Inc. performed a Phase I Engineering Investigation and Evaluation of the site for NYSDEC for the purpose of computing a Hazard Ranking System score needed to evaluate whether or not the site should be placed on the National Priorities List (NPL).  The site was included on the NPL in 1986. The site’s PRPs, under an Administrative Order with the EPA, removed and disposed of 1,858 drums of waste in 1986. In 1987 and 1988, EPA removed the remaining drums and visibly-contaminated surficial soil and debris. Long-Term Cleanup: In 1985, pursuant to a cooperative agreement with EPA, NYSDEC through its contractor, URS Company, Inc., conducted a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) designed to determine the nature and extent of the contamination at the site, to assess the threat that the site posed to public health and the environment, and to develop and evaluate various alternatives to remediate the site.  The RI activities included the implementation of a geophysical survey of the site (including magnetometer surveying, seismic refraction profiling and terrain conductivity measurements) and drum staging and sampling of environmental media, as well as the collection and analysis of groundwater and soil samples.  As part of a supplemental RI/FS, EPA's contractor, Ebasco Services, Inc. (Ebasco) conducted deep soil sampling in 1988 for the purpose of determining the vertical extent of soil contamination. The 1988 RI/FS and supplemental RI/FS concluded that as a result of the removal actions taken at the site, only low-level residual soil contamination remained on-site.  VOCs were detected in the groundwater. Accordingly, on December 28, 1988, a record of decision was signed, selecting a remedy for the site.  The remedy included placement of a 1-foot clean soil cover over residually-contaminated areas and regrading and revegetating the site; putting in erosion control measures, as needed, on the embankment sloping toward Ox Creek; institutional controls to prevent the use of the underlying groundwater or and the future development of the site for residential use or any use that involving excavation at the site or disturbance to the soil cover; and long-term ground-water, soil, sediment and surface water monitoring to evaluate any changes should they occur. In 1989, a consent decree was entered by the Northern District of New York with the potentially repsonsible parties (PRPs) to undertake the design and construction of the remedy selected for the site.  The design was performed by Canonie Environmental Services Corporation. One hundred-year storm event calculations performed during the design indicated that the erosive forces due to the overland flow velocities would be minimal.  Therefore, rip-rap protection on the slopes to the wetland would not be required.  EPA approved the remedial design in 1991.           The PRPs subsequently awarded a remedial action contract to Sevenson Environmental Services, Inc. to implement the remedial design. Following on-site mobilization, clearing and grubbing, perimeter fence installation and surveying were conducted.  Subsequently, grading of the areas to be covered commenced.  During the course of grading two above-grade mounds of soil, it was discovered that one mound contained parts of four drums.  Further, while grading the slope to the wetland, parts of three other buried drums were uncovered.  The drum parts were removed and placed in overpack drums.  The soil mounds were removed and the soil was stockpiled.  Samples of the drum contents, stockpiled soil and soil in the area where the buried drums were found were collected and analyzed.  Based upon the analytical results, it was decided by the PRPs to dispose of the drums and the stockpiled soil off-site.  The results of the analyses of the soil in the areas where the drums were discovered indicated that the contaminants and their concentrations were comparable to those found during the RI.  The installation of the soil cover and revegetation was completed in 1992. The site was deleted from the NPL in 1996.
In 2002, EPA and the PRPs agreed upon a post-remediation sampling program that included the collection and analysis of groundwater samples for volatile organic compounds (VOCs) once every five years (the first sampling event was conducted in 2002 and the second event in 2007).  Based upon the results of these samples, groundwater sampling for tetrachloroethylene (PCE) only was conducted twice in 2014.  The PCE results from both events were below the NYSDEC maximum contaminant level.  Subsequently, EPA determined that the groundwater monitoring should be discontinued; the monitoring wells were abandoned in 2017.

What Is the Current Site Status?
Site inspections are conducted once every five years to check the integrity of the fencing, identify irregular settlement, cracking, erosion or other disturbances which might affect the integrity of the soil and vegetative cover and to check the integrity of the monitoring wells. Maintenance is performed as necessary. Five-year reviews are conducted at sites to ensure that the implemented actions are protective of public health and the environment and are functioning as designed. Five-year reviews at the site were conducted in March 1998, March 2003, March 2008, March 2013, January 2018, and November 2022. The five-year reviews concluded that the response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. The next five-year review will be in November 2027.
