Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Robintech Inc./National Pipe Co. site is located in Vestal, New York. The 12-acre site is an inactive manufacturing facility. The site property was owned by Robinson Technical Products from 1966 to 1970, Robintech, Inc. from 1970 to 1982, and the Buffton Corporation from 1982 to 2006 (Buffton Corporation changed its name to BFX Hospitality, Inc. in 1996). The site was most recently occupied by National Pipe and Plastics, which manufactured polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe from inert PVC resin. While National Pipe and Plastics has offices at the site, the manufacturing component of the business was relocated. In 1966, Robinson Technical Products built the main building that remains on-site. The first floor of the building was used for the manufacturing of aircraft engine mounts and automobile accelerator control cables. The second floor was used for the assembly of electronic cable. In 1970, Robinson Technical Products was renamed Robintech, and the first-floor production activities were replaced with PVC pipe extrusion operations. Between 1966 and 1979, the pipe staging area was paved in four successive stages to the north. The warehouse was built in 1974. Buffton Corporation bought the property in 1982. The site at that time was occupied by its subsidiaries, the National Pipe Company and Electro-Mech Incorporated. Electro-Mech continued the assembly of electronic cable on the second floor. National Pipe Company continued the PVC pipe extrusion operations. An effluent sample collected in 1984 by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation to verify discharge permit compliance found several VOCs that were not covered under the facility’s existing permit. After site investigations, EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in June 1986.
Facility operations contaminated soils and groundwater with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which are contaminants that evaporate easily in the air. The site’s long-term cleanup is ongoing.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Following a remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the nature and extent of site contamination and to evaluate remedial alternatives, EPA selected a remedy for the site in a March 1992 Record of Decision (ROD). The remedy included pumping and treatment of contaminated bedrock and overburden groundwater at the site. The results of a pre-design investigation, completed in 1996, indicated that the overburden groundwater and subsurface soils were contaminated with VOCs at levels much greater than those previously detected. In addition, the investigation identified the presence of an extremely low-permeability overburden formation with extremely low groundwater yield. Therefore, the extraction of contaminated groundwater from the overburden formation was determined to be infeasible. In July 1997, EPA issued a new ROD, modifying the site’s remedy. The new remedy included excavation of the contaminated unsaturated and saturated soils, treatment of the excavated soils via low-temperature thermal desorption and redeposition, natural attenuation of the overburden groundwater, and continued pumping of the bedrock aquifer.
Excavation, treatment, and backfilling of contaminated soil from three areas of the site started in 1999 and finished in 2001. The system ran until 2003, when it became apparent that treatment would be required to continue to meet the discharge requirements. The addition of two aqueous phase in-line carbon absorption treatment units were finished in 2005. The treated water, in combination with city water, was used for non-contact cooling in the on-site manufacturing facility before being discharged. The system operated until 2014, when the pipe-manufacturing operation moved off-site. Alternatives to the pumping and treating of groundwater are currently being evaluated. Five-year reviews are undertaken at sites to ensure that implemented remedies protect public health and the environment and that they function as intended by site decision documents. Five-year reviews were conducted in September 2006, September 2011, and September 2016. In the September 2016 five-year review, EPA concluded that there are no exposure pathways that could result in unacceptable risks and none are expected, as long as the site use does not change and the implemented engineered and institutional controls are properly operated, monitored and maintained. EPA will conduct another five-year review by September 2021.

What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is being addressed in a single, long-term remedial phase focused on cleanup of the entire site.
The excavation, treatment, and backfilling of contaminated soil from three areas of the site was completed in 2001. As a result of the soil cleanup, approximately 10,000 tons of contaminated soil was treated. Bedrock groundwater treatment continued through 2014, at which point it was determined that in-situ treatment methods should be evaluated as an alternative to long-term groundwater pump and treat.  The system was turned off and the aquifer allowed to re-equilabrate, Because of nationwide concerns regarding vapor intrusion at residential and commercial properties near sites with VOC-contaminated groundwater, the soil vapor intrusion pathway wasevaluated. No actions are pending as a result of this investigation.
In 2018, EPA issued an Explanation of Significant Differences documenting EPA’s determination to incorporate into the remedy institutional controls that provide for an evaluation of structures for vapor intrusion and, depending on the results, periodic monitoring and/or installation of mitigation measures, as appropriate.
Enforcement Information
In 1998, EPA entered into a Consent Decree with BFX Hospitality, Inc., the successor to Buffton Corporation, to implement the remedy selected in the 1997 ROD. The Consent Decree was entered in U.S. District Court (approved by the Judge) in 1998. A Stipulation and Order was finalized between EPA, the Department of Justice, and BFX in 2005 to clarify the responsibilities of BFX under the Consent Decree.  BFX ceased to exist in 2010.
