CARROLL & DUBIES SEWAGE DISPOSALPORT JERVIS, NY 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Carroll & Dubies Sewage Disposal site is located northeast of Port Jervis, in Deerpark, New York. The 3-acre site is a former septic and industrial waste disposal facility where wastes were deposited into seven unlined lagoons. The disposal operations resulted in the contamination of site soil and ground water with volatile organic compounds (VOCs) as well as some chlorinated VOCs.  Soil and sediment cleanup has been completed. Long-term ground water monitoring is ongoing. The Carroll and Dubies Sewage Disposal site consisted of seven inactive lagoons that were used for the disposal of various wastes since 1970. Until 1979, waste from two nearby cosmetic manufacturers was deposited into unlined lagoons at the site. Septic tank waste was also accepted at the site until 1989.  Approximately 2,000 residents live within a mile of the site. The nearest homes are about 1/4 mile southeast of the site. A steep slope, woods, open areas and the Port Jervis Municipal Landfill surround the former facility. The City of Port Jervis is supplied with water from several reservoirs located more than a mile upstream from the site. Homes near the site rely on private wells. Approximately 1,500 feet to the east of the site is Gold Creek, which lies between the site and the Neversink River. Site Responsibility: This site is being addressed through Federal and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. This site is being addressed in two remedial phases focusing on cleanup of the source areas and the groundwater. 
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Source Areas: The source area investigations involved characterizing the nature and extent of chemical compounds associated with the lagoons by obtaining soil and waste samples, and were completed in 1993. Based on the results of these investigations, remedial alternatives were developed and a Record of Decision (ROD) selecting a final cleanup plan for the source areas was signed in March 1995. An Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) was issued in August 1998. The ESD describes changes to the March 1995 ROD. The changes described in the ESD include: 1) the excavation and off-site treatment and disposal of approximately 13,300 tons of lagoon sludges and soil contaminated with organic and inorganic contaminants; 2) in-situ soil vapor extraction to treat subsurface soils impacted by volatile organic compounds, unless it is more practicable to excavate and dispose of these soils off-site; 3) on-site treatment of some contaminated soil and materials by ex-situ soil vapor extraction prior to off-site disposal; and 4) backfilling and regrading of excavated areas with clean soil.  The remedial action, which was implemented by the PRPs, began in April 1999 and was completed in January 2000. Groundwater: The groundwater investigation concluded that migration of contaminants through the groundwater had occurred and that significant levels of contaminants had not migrated from the source areas. A ROD selecting a final cleanup plan for the contaminated groundwater was signed in September 1996 and included: natural attenuation of organic contaminants in the groundwater; implementation of institutional controls to restrict the use and installation of groundwater wells throughout the contaminated groundwater plume; monitoring of the groundwater; and sampling in Gold Creek.   Cleanup of the source areas finished in January 2000. About 34,000 tons of lagoon sludges, sediment and contaminated soil were dug up and disposed of off site. The source area cleanup mitigated the potential for further contamination of site groundwater. Surface water and sediment sampling in Gold Creek indicated that the site is not affecting this waterway. Recent monitoring data indicates that the extent of the plume has been established and that benzene concentrations appear to decline with distance away from the former lagoons. Groundwater monitoring is continuing at the Site. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Cleanup of the source areas finished in January 2000. About 34,000 tons of lagoon sludges, sediment and contaminated soil were dug up and disposed of off site.  Groundwater monitoring is continuing at the Site. Top of Page