ANCHOR CHEMICALSHICKSVILLE, NY
  Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Anchor Chemicals site is in Hicksville, New York. Chemical blending and packaging operations at the site led to soil and groundwater contamination. Anchor Chemicals leased the site property from 1964 to 1978. The company later became known as Anchor-Lith Kem Ko. It made, blended and stored chemicals for the graphic arts industry. The on-site facility included two solvent mixing rooms and several container storage areas. The company installed 17 underground storage tanks in 1964. The tanks ranged in size from 500 gallons to 4,000 gallons and lay under chemical mixing rooms. The tanks stored chemicals and solvents such as acetone, 1,1,1 trichloroethane, methylene chloride, 2-butoxyethanol and isopropyl alcohol. The company also stored the materials in seven aboveground tanks. These tanks ranged in size from 550 gallons to 1,500 gallons. In 1995, EPA dug up and removed about 21 tons of contaminated sediment from four dry wells. EPA sampled the groundwater in 1996 and 1997 and found that the site no longer poses a risk to human health and the environment. After cleanup, EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in 1999. The Anchor Chemicals site is located in Hicksville, New York. Chemical blending and packaging operations there led to soil and ground water contamination. In 1995, a short-term cleanup called a removal action dug up and removed about 21 tons of contaminated sediments from four dry wells. Ground water sampling in 1996 and 1997 confirmed that the site no longer poses an unacceptable risk to human health and the environment. After cleanup, EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in 1999.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Nassau County Health Department (NCHD) discovered 1,1,1 trichloroethane, trichloroethene (TCE) and tetrachloroethene (PCE) in liquid samples near a dry well in 1977. In response, Anchor Chemical submitted a spill prevention plan to the NCHD. Anchor Chemicals took six leaking underground tanks out of service between mid-1981 and early 1983. The company installed three monitoring wells in 1982. Well sampling found that chlorinated organics, which are used as solvents and degreasing agents, contaminated subsurface soil and groundwater. Sampling also found elevated levels of metals and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in four dry wells on site. Company operations shut down in 1985. In 1977, the Nassau County Health Department (NCHD) discovered 1,1,1 trichloroethane, trichloroethene (TCE) and tetrachloroethene (PCE) in liquid samples near a dry well. In response, Anchor Chemical submitted a spill prevention plan to the NCHD. Between mid-1981 and early 1983, six leaking underground tanks were taken out of service. The company installed three monitoring wells in 1982. Well sampling found that subsurface soil and ground water were contaminated with chlorinated organics. Sampling also found elevated levels of metals and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in four dry wells on site. Company operations shut down in 1985; a machine resale company currently occupies the site property.
What Is the Current Site Status?
Following cleanup and groundwater monitoring, EPA selected "no further action" for the site’s cleanup in 1995. EPA removed the site from the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in 1999. The site property is now a retail outlet store. Following cleanup and ground water monitoring, EPA selected "no further action" for the site’s remedy in 1995. EPA removed the site from the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in 1999.
