Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Mattiace Petrochemical Co., Inc. site is a 2.5-acre former chemical distribution facility located in Glen Cove, New York, that had a Quonset hut (a lightweight, metal, semi-circular building), shed, concrete loading dock, and 56 storage tanks on the site during its operating period. In 1987, Mattiace filed for bankruptcy and closed the facility. Also, in 1987, after seven years of failed negotiations and litigation regarding various waste-handling and environmental violations, the State of New York seized the site property. From the mid-1960s until 1987, Mattiace received organic solvents by tank truck; stored the solvents in aboveground and underground storage tanks; and blended and repackaged the solvents into 55-gallon drums under a covered section of the concrete loading dock in the northeast corner of the site. They stacked and temporarily stored 55-gallon drums on the loading dock before shipping to customers. The company also operated a subsidiary, the M&M Drum Cleaning Company, which cleaned, pressure tested, and repainted drums in the metal Quonset hut on the western portion of the site until 1982. The drum cleaning caused a solvent mixture (that contained water) that was collected in a wet well near the southeast corner of the Quonset hut. The liquids in the wet well periodically discharged to one of the adjacent aboveground tanks or into a leaching pool on site. Wet wells and leaching pools are both types of below ground tanks or pools used to temporarily hold wastewater, or water contaminated with chemicals or other pollutants, from buildings and other sources. They temporarily hold the wastewater until it is pumped to a treatment system or sewer, acting as a buffer to prevent the downstream systems from becoming overloaded. At the site, there were a total of 32 underground and 24 aboveground storage tanks, with the underground tanks interconnected by a spill prevention system (a system that helps prevent contaminants from entering waters). Excess material from overfilled tanks drained through a series of four concrete manholes that discharged into the solvent/stormwater separator (a device that removes contaminants from stormwater using gravity and separation) in the southeast corner of the site, which also acted as a stormwater collection system. Stormwater from the lower portion of the separator was intended to be drained by gravity then pumped into the northwest leaching pools. However, it has been reported that the liquid collected in the separator, along with liquid ponded in the southeast corner of the property, were often pumped through a hose down the Mattiace driveway while the facility was operational. In 1988, the EPA secured the site and removed more than 100,000 gallons of hazardous liquids from drums and tanks left onsite. Following additional site investigations, the EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in March 1989. The EPA finalized a cleanup plan, documented in the 1990 Record of Decision, or ROD, which set plans for removing buried drums and surrounding soil. The EPA finalized another cleanup plan in the 1991 ROD for the site’s long-term soil and groundwater cleanup, which was fully operational by the end of 1998. A September 2014 ROD Amendment modified the plan identified in the previous RODs to include placing a subsurface barrier wall, along with adding soil and vapor treatment systems to improve the effectiveness of the cleanup. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Emergency Actions: In 1988, the EPA secured the site, collected samples, and removed hazardous materials left onsite by Mattiace, including at least 100,000 gallons of flammable liquids, 20,000 gallons of contaminated water, and 1,800 gallons of liquids containing polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCBs. Lab packs, typically drums or pails used to consolidate small containers of varying chemicals with internal padding and segregation, were crushed and sent to an off-site incineration facility. Some owners of compressed gas cylinders and empty portable tanks reclaimed them. All other hazardous materials left by Mattiace were taken to approved off-site treatment and disposal facilities. Buried Drums: After a geophysical survey, the EPA found and characterized the contents of buried drums on the west-central part of the site. The EPA signed a ROD in 1990 to remove, treat, and dispose of the drums and contaminated soil from the drum burial area off-site. In the spring of 1992, the EPA completed the excavation and off-site disposal of about 400 buried drums and contaminated soil. Soil and Groundwater: After a comprehensive remedial investigation and feasibility study, or RI/FS, to determine the nature and extent of the contamination, and to evaluate remedial (or cleanup) alternatives, the EPA’s June 1991 ROD set a cleanup plan including limited excavation of soil contaminated with pesticides, removal of all tanks and cisterns, in-place vapor extraction of soil, and pumping and treating of groundwater. The EPA completed the excavation and disposal of three relatively small areas contaminated with pesticides by March 1995. By the fall of 1996, the agency removed all tanks, cisterns, and associated piping. In the fall of 1998, the EPA began operating the site’s integrated groundwater and soil vapor treatment facility. In July 2003, a private company assumed the responsibility for long-term operation of the treatment facility under an agreement between the EPA and the site’s potentially responsible parties, or PRPs. PRPs are individuals or companies that may have owned or operated the site; generated waste that was disposed of or released on the site; or may, in some way be responsible for causing or contributing to the contamination. The EPA provides oversight of facility operations by the PRPs and their contractors. In 2012, the PRPs began a supplemental RI/FS to further define the nature and extent of contamination at the site and to evaluate alternatives for addressing the remaining contamination. The resulting September 2014 ROD Amendment modified the cleanup plan by selecting a vertical subsurface barrier wall on portions of the site border to prevent groundwater and soil gas from moving offsite (completed in 2017), as well as replacing the groundwater pump-and-treat system with a combination of in-situ thermal treatment, bioventing, and bioremediation methods that were expected to be more effective. In situ (in-place) thermal treatment uses heat applied underground to move or “mobilize” harmful chemicals through soil or groundwater where they are collected and piped to the ground surface to be treated using other cleanup methods. Bioventing involves stimulating natural microorganisms through the addition of a gas (typically air) to improve bioremediation, which is the breakdown of contaminants by natural microorganisms into non-harmful material. The thermal treatment of “hot spots” in soil, or small areas of higher concentration of contaminants, operated from November 2018 through September 2020, when it was deemed complete and shut down. The bioventing system began operating in May 2022 and remains in operation. Institutional Controls: Institutional controls are in place until cleanup goals are met that would allow unrestricted use of the site. These controls prevent inappropriate withdrawals of groundwater; require evaluation of the need for vapor barriers and vapor intrusion systems for any future buildings that may be constructed on the former Mattiace property; and prevent activities or uses of the property that might interfere with any of the treatment systems (including the barrier wall) that are in place. An environmental easement, which is a legal agreement that restricts property uses and ensures the continued maintenance of any needed engineering controls, will be finalized once the cleanup is complete. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The EPA addressed the site in two stages: emergency actions and a long-term remedial phase focused on soil gas and groundwater cleanup. The EPA completed the emergency actions between 1988 and 1992. Since then, the facility has been on the NPL and undergoing long-term cleanup of groundwater and soil gas based primarily on RODs issued in 1991 and 2014. After several changes in cleanup methods to address different stages of cleanup and the resulting changes in site conditions, the current operation includes a subsurface wall serving as a hydraulic barrier to prevent movement of contaminated groundwater and soil gas from moving offsite while a system of bioventing and vapor treatment continue to remove and treat contamination from groundwater and soil gas. This system also supports and enhances bioremediation of the subsurface soil. In addition to ongoing oversight of the PRP’s contractor conducting the site cleanup, the EPA continues to conduct a formal review of the site and all systems every five years, known as a “Five Year Review”. This thorough review uses site inspections, detailed record reviews, and discussions with the operators to ensure that the remediation systems are operating properly, that the current cleanup methods are still the best approach for the specific site and contaminants, and that the approach protects people’s health and the environment. Top of Page