BEC TRUCKINGVESTAL, NY
  Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The BEC Trucking site is located on Stewart Road in Vestal, New York. Prior to the mid-1960s, the site was a marshland. The company that became BEC Trucking filled in the marshland with various materials, including fly ash, a coal combustion product, from a local power company, to raise the ground level. After raising the ground level, BEC Trucking used the property to manufacture truck bodies. The truck body fabrication, painting, and vehicle maintenance operations generated hazardous wastes, which BEC stored on-site. Alerted by municipal officials in 1982, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) found about 50 improperly stored drums on-site. The drums contained waste motor oil, metal cutting oil, paint thinners, solvents, methanol, toluene, and petroleum distillates. Investigators also observed stained soil where spills had occurred. COGS, Inc. purchased the property in 1983. The new owner removed the improperly stored drums and placed contaminated soil into four new drums stored on-site. The site was listed on EPA’s Superfund National Priorities List (NPL) in June 1986. Cleanup was completed and the site was removed the site from the NPL in October 1992.
The property is currently used to store construction materials. The area around the site is primarily commercial and industrial. Stewart Road borders the site to the south, industrial properties lie to the east and north, and the Stewart Trailer Park and wetlands are to the west. Residences located around the site, including those in the trailer park, are connected to a public water system. 

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
COGS, Inc. removed 50 drums and the associated stained soil from the site, eliminating a source of contamination. An additional investigation of the conditions at the site showed that the levels of contaminants in the groundwater, surface water, and sediments are within the accepted state and federal guidelines. EPA signed a decision document referred to as a Record of Decision  in 1989, recommending no further action at the site. EPA collected samples in 1991 and again in 1996 that indicated that contamination was under control and no further monitoring was necessary.
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA addressed the site in two stages: immediate actions and a long-term cleanup phase. Immediate Actions: The property owner removed 30 empty drums and 20 drums containing waste motor oil, metal cutting oil, paint thinners, solvents, methanol, toluene and petroleum distillates in 1983. The property owner also removed stained soil located around the drums and contained the stained soil in drums on-site. EPA removed these drums in 1991. Long-Term Cleanup: EPA investigated the site to determine the nature and extent of contamination.. EPA concluded that following the cleanup activities conducted in 1983, the site did not pose a potential threat to human health and the environment.
EPA removed the site from the National Priorities List in October 1992.
