Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Niagara Mohawk Power Corp. (NMPC) (Saratoga Springs Plant) site is located in Saratoga Springs, New York. From 1868 until 1929, NMPC's predecessor, the Saratoga Gas Light Company produced gas at the Niagara Mohawk property on Excelsior Avenue. The gas, which was used for lighting and heating, was manufactured from coke (a solid carbon material that resembles coal), coal and petroleum oils. The early gas production processes generated a dense, oily liquid known as coal tar and other waste materials as by-products. These wastes, which contain hazardous substances, were disposed of at various locations on the NMPC property and resulted in areas of soil, sediment, and groundwater contamination. The Saratoga Gas Light Company used six gas holders on the property.  A gas holder house is a structure dug into the ground where gas was stored after the gas was purified. Gas Holder numbers 1 and 2 were round brick structures built between 1868 and 1873. Both holders were about 70 feet in diameter. Holders 1, 4, 5 and 6, and the original plant building used to manufacture the gas, have since been demolished. The tar/water separator (Holder Number 3) was decommissioned and filled with inactive/non-hazardous material. The round brick building surrounding Holder Number 2 remains on the NMPC property and is referred to as the Round House. The former substation building also remains on the property and is used for storage. Niagara Mohawk operated the site from 1950 to 1999 as a district service center and headquarters for its electric line, natural gas, vehicle and equipment repair, maintenance, storage facilities, and tree trimming crews servicing the Saratoga District. Between 1965 and 1985, NMPC evaluated the on-site buildings during the construction and modification of buildings on the property. NMPC notified the EPA in 1982 that the Saratoga Springs property was once the location of a gas manufacturing facility and that previous owners may have disposed of coal tar on the property. After performing environmental investigations, the EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in February 1990. The site includes a 7-acre property that was formerly owned by NMPC and is currently owned by the National Grid, as well as other areas that have been impacted by contamination from the site. The site includes 1) the 7-acre NMPC Property (former manufactured gas plant); 2) a 2.3-acre property referred to as the former Skating Rink Property; 3) an abandoned underground brick storm sewer; 4) sections of Spring Run Creek; 5) the 0.35 acre former Spa Steel Property; 6) a grass-covered parcel (the active Old Red Spring well and area); 7) a portion of Excelsior Avenue north of the Old Red Spring area; and 8) a portion of the paved church parking lot west of the Old Red Spring area. The source of drinking water for the City of Saratoga Springs is Loughberry Lake, which has not been impacted by contamination from the NMPC site. A total of 18 mineral springs throughout Saratoga Springs, including the Old Red Spring, provide water for public consumption. The Old Red Spring well is the only spring located on the project area and gets water from a separate deep aquifer that has not been impacted by the former manufactured gas plant.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The NMPC Superfund site consists of two operable units (i.e., distinct portions of a site addressed by separate investigation and/or cleanup approaches). The first Operable Unit (OU 1) addressed contaminated soil, groundwater and sediment in the five areas: 1) the NMPC Property, which is a former manufactured gas plant; 2) an approximate 2.3-acre property referred to as the former Skating Rink property; 3) an abandoned underground brick storm sewer; 4) sections of Spring Run Creek; and 5) the Spa Steel Property, which is approximately 0.35 acres in size. After a remedial investigation and feasibility study to determine the nature and extent of site contamination and to evaluate cleanup alternatives, in 1995, the EPA finalized a cleanup plan to address contaminants in the groundwater and soil on the Niagara Mohawk property, at the former skating rink, and in stream sediment along portions of Spring Run Creek (OU 1). The phase one cleanup work began in May 2001. The company removed contaminated soil and sediment from areas containing coal tar waste, installed underground barriers to contain the contaminated groundwater and installed a protective cap to cover contaminated soil. This work finished in 2002. In all, over 68,400 tons of contaminated soil and 16,700 tons of contaminated sediment were removed from the site. NMPC, currently doing business as National Grid, is continuing to operate, maintain, and monitor the systems that were constructed as part of the completed cleanup, including a groundwater pumping and treatment system. In 2006, additional subsurface soil and groundwater contamination was discovered to the west and southwest of the Niagara Mohawk property in a half-acre area near Excelsior, Warren and High Rock Avenues. This additional contamination is designated as OU 2. In 2013, the EPA finalized the OU 2 soil cleanup plan to clean up the additional contaminants present in subsurface soil including the cleanup of source material in the form of non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL) that has migrated from the NMPC Property and has impacted subsurface soil and groundwater in the Old Red Spring area. NAPL's are hydrocarbon liquids (commonly called oils) that do not readily mix with or dissolve in water (non-aqueous). OU 2 (0.5 acres) consists of: (1) a grass-covered parcel (the active Old Red Spring well and area); (2) a portion of Excelsior Avenue north of the Old Red Spring area; and (3) a portion of the paved church parking lot west of the Old Red Spring area.
The OU 2 soil cleanup work began in December 2018 and was completed in August 2019. Under the terms of the agreement with the EPA, National Grid solidified and stabilized contaminated areas of soil in the Old Red Spring area and a section of the paved church parking lot with a cement-like material. The company also installed underground barriers to contain contaminated soil underneath the surface of Excelsior Avenue. Following the work, any grassy areas, plants, parking lots, roadways or sidewalks impacted during the cleanup were restored. In addition, in September 2021, the contaminated groundwater and subsurface soil located outside of the treated area in the Old Red Spring parcel were treated using non-hazardous oxygen-releasing materials and nutrients to break down the contamination to meet federal and state water quality standards. The EPA will require the periodic collection and analysis of groundwater samples to verify that the level and extent of the contamination is declining. The EPA plan also requires environmental easements and restrictions on land use that will prevent activities that could disturb the cleanup and prohibits the use of groundwater wells, among other restrictions.

What Is the Current Site Status?
In October 2024, the easements and Use Restriction Agreement were recorded and Site Management Plans completed for the property areas at the site.
To date, the cleanup of the NMPC site has been conducted by and paid for by National Grid or its predecessor with oversight by the EPA.
