FOREST GLEN MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONNIAGARA FALLS, NY 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Forest Glen Mobile Home Subdivision site is located in Niagara Falls, New York. Prior to 1973, the 39-acre area was used for illegal chemical waste disposal, contaminating soil and groundwater with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs). Residential development of the site property took place in 1979. Following immediate actions to protect human health and the environment, EPA put the site’s long-term remedy in place. Groundwater treatment is ongoing. The 39-acre Forest Glen Mobile Home Subdivision site included an 11-acre former mobile home park which was built on land where chemical wastes had been illegally disposed. Approximately 150 people lived in the Forest Glen Subdivision. The area surrounding the site is used for residential and commercial purposes. Vacant land, which is heavily vegetated, is located to the north and east of the site. A railroad yard lies to the west. The mobile home park was serviced by a public water system. East Gill Creek flows along the northern edge of the former trailer park. Site Responsibility: This site has been addressed through Federal and Potentially Responsible Parties’ actions Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Immediate Actions: EPA temporarily relocated 27 families and placed a high-visibility fence around contaminated areas. EPA identified and temporarily covered two “hot spot” areas Permanent Relocation: In 1989, EPA permanently relocated 53 families living on site. Relocation took place between June 1990 and December 1992. EPA put in a fence around the site to prevent access.
Long-term Cleanup: EPA selected the site’s groundwater remedy in the site’s September 1999 Record of Decision, or ROD. The document also updated the soil remedy to reflect a change in the site’s anticipated future use from residential land uses to commercial and industrial uses. Contaminated groundwater is extracted and transported via sanitary sewer for treatment in the Niagara Falls Wastewater Treatment Plant. Less contaminated groundwater west of the site is being monitored and allowed to naturally attenuate. Natural attenuation describes a variety of in-place processes that, under favorable conditions, act without human intervention to reduce the mass, toxicity, mobility, volume or concentration of contaminants in groundwater. Contaminated soil was dug up and consolidated in the former subdivision area. An engineered cap was placed over the contaminated soil and a commercial building was built on the cap as part of the soil remedy. The building is currently in use as a distribution facility. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site has been addressed in three stages: immediate actions and two long-term remedial phases focused on permanent relocation of affected residents and cleanup of the entire site. Construction of the site’s remedy finished in 2003. Groundwater extraction and treatment is ongoing. Three groundwater extraction wells installed in the cap area pump a total of approximately 20 gallons per minute . A monitored natural attenuation study found that contaminants in the off-property groundwater plume are naturally attenuating. Concentrations of contaminants in the off-property plume are currently below Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs). Groundwater monitoring is ongoing. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
EPA reached a settlement with potentially responsible parties (PRPs) at 
the site for reimbursement of EPA’s past costs. The Goodyear Tire & 
Rubber Company has been implementing the 1999 ROD under a court-approved
 June 2001 Consent Decree. The abandoned trailers and home were removed 
from the Site in September 2002. Construction for both the soil and 
groundwater remedies was completed in September 2003. Remedial Action 
for Soil was completed. The ground-water remedial action is ongoing.
Top of Page