MACKENZIE CHEMICAL WORKSCENTRAL ISLIP, NY
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The MacKenzie Chemical Works site is in Central Islip, New York. MacKenzie Chemical Works (MCW) manufactured various chemical products, including fuel additives and metal acetylacetonates at the property from 1948 to 1987. According to the Suffolk County Department of Health Services, the company stored 1,2,3-trichloropropane in three 10,000-gallon tanks on-site. Other historical waste sources include other storage tanks, leaking drums, waste lagoons, cesspools and stormwater drywells. Spills, explosions, and fires occurred at the facility, including a methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) spill in 1977, a nitrous oxide release in 1978, and an MEK spill/fire in 1979. EPA completed the soil cleanup. The site is available for redevelopment. . An EPA assessment in 1983 recommended that action be taken at the site. Subsequently, MCW arranged for the disposal of 33 drums of stained surface soil excavated during a 1979 cleanup effort and 22 drums of liquid wastes. MCW operations at the site stopped in 1987. Following additional site investigations, EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 2001.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed in one stage: a long-term remedial phase focused on cleanup of the entire site. EPA selected a remedy for the site in a Record of Decision (ROD) or cleanup plan, in 2003. The ROD called for thermally-enhanced in-place soil vapor extraction (SVE) for soils contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), limited excavation and off-site disposal of soils contaminated with semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs), demolition of the former laboratory building, and groundwater treatment using in-place air sparging with ozone injection. In 2004, work began on constructing pilot-scale treatment systems for the soil and groundwater remedies. This effort culminated in completion of the construction of the SVE system (the soil remedy). The SVE system started up in 2004 and ran continuously until 2016, and then as needed after that time. With subsurface soils having met the soil cleanup goal, the system was decommisioned in 2020. The upper five feet of non-sandy surficial anthropomorphic material, which did not respond to SVE in the source area, was excavated and disposed off site in 2020 to reduce the remaining residual soil contamination to below cleanup goals. With regard to the groundwater remedy, several chemical oxidation injections, the latest being in 2016, have substantially reduced contamination in groundwater. NYSDEC is currently evaluating groundwater for further injections. In August 2004, EPA demolished the former laboratory building.

What Is the Current Site Status?
Five-year reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. Five-year reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents.  .  EPA conducted five-year reviews in October 2011, May 2017, and January 2022. The latest review concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. The next five-year review will be in January 2027.
