RICHARDSON HILL ROAD LANDFILL/PONDSIDNEY CENTER, NY 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Richardson Hill Road Landfill site is located in Sidney and Masonville, New York. The privately-owned landfill accepted municipal waste and spent oils from the Scintilla Division of Bendix Corporation (predecessor to Honeywell International, Inc. and Amphenol Corp.) from 1964 to 1969. Landfill operations contaminated soil, sediment, and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. The site consists of two sections–the South Area and the North Area. The South Area contains an eight-acre landfill, South Pond, and Herrick Hollow Creek. The North Area includes two small disposal trenches and a manmade surface water body called North Pond. Following immediate actions to protect human health and the environment and additional investigations, EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in 1987. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed in two stages: immediate actions and a long-term remedial phase focused on cleanup of the entire site. Immediate Actions: In 1993, in response to a fish kill in South Pond which was attributed to the release of contaminants from the oil disposal pit, the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) excavated about 2,200 cubic yards of highly-contaminated sediment from South Pond. In addition, the PRPs installed seep interceptor collection basins upgradient of South Pond and installed a sediment trap weir system at the outlet of South Pond to prevent the downstream migration of contaminated sediment. Also, two water supply treatment systems were installed at nearby homes with contamination in their wells attributed to the site. Following the detection of contamination in an additional private water supply in 1997, it was replaced with a deeper well. In 1999, the PRPs fenced the landfill and placed a sediment trap in Herrick Hollow Creek, about a mile south of the South Pond, to minimize migration of contaminated sediment further downstream. During the long-term cleanup, the sediment trap was removed, along with the contaminated sediment in the South Pond and the Herrick Hollow Creek. Long-Term Cleanup: Based on the results of a remedial investigation to determine the nature and extent of the contamination at the site and an evaluation of cleanup alternatives in a feasibility study, EPA selected a cleanup plan for the site in 1997. The cleanup plan called for soil and sediment excavation/dredging, consolidation, on- and/or off-site disposal, installation of a landfill cap, Toxic Substance Control Act cell construction (a disposal cell that accepts PCB-contaminated waste with levels greater than 50 milligrams per kilogram), and groundwater extraction (North Area via extraction wells and South Area via an interceptor trench) and treatment. Contaminated soil and sediment excavation, disposal cell construction, and landfill cap construction were completed in 2006. The groundwater extraction and treatment system has been operating since 2004. Groundwater investigations conducted from 2007 to 2008 found contamination southeast of the groundwater interceptor trench. Subsequently, a recovery well was installed in this area. The water is being treated at the existing treatment facility. To prevent dewatering the nearby wetland, the groundwater is being extracted at a low rate and on an intermittent basis. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The groundwater extraction and treatment system continues to operate. Five-year reviews are conducted at sites to ensure that the cleanups are working as intended and protective of human health and the environment. Five-year reviews were conducted at the site in September 2007, July 2012, July 2017, and April 2022. The most recent five-year review concluded that the actions at the site to date were performed in accordance with the cleanup plan selected by EPA. The implemented actions at the site protect human health and the environment in the short-term because the waste has been consolidated and capped and the groundwater is not impacting residences downgradient of the site. For the site to be protective in the long term, additional evaluations of the groundwater capture system for the eastern portion of the site need to be performed. The next five-year review will be conducted by April 2027. Top of Page