Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 4.6-square mile Onondaga Lake is located along the northern side of the city of Syracuse in Onondaga County, New York. Its shoreline borders the city of Syracuse, as well as the towns of Geddes and Salina and villages of Solvay and Liverpool. The site includes the lake and seven major and other minor waterways, as well as several land-based sources of contamination. The lake receives water from a drainage basin of approximately 285 square miles, located almost entirely within Onondaga County. Treated wastewater from the Metropolitan Syracuse Wastewater Treatment Plant discharges into the southeastern end of the lake. The lake flows into the Seneca River, which flows into the Oswego River. The Oswego River ultimately flows into Lake Ontario. Onondaga Lake received industrial and municipal sewage discharges for more than 100 years. The availability of salt and limestone along and nearby the lake led Honeywell International, Inc.’s (Honeywell’s) predecessor companies (e.g., Solvay Process Company, Allied Chemical Corp. and AlliedSignal, Inc.) to build their industrial facilities along the west side of the lake. In 1946, Allied Chemical started a mercury cell process that resulted in waste streams containing mercury and heavy metals being discharged by its facilities at Willis Avenue and Bridge Street. Honeywell’s Semet Residue Ponds are another source of contamination to the lake. While Honeywell is the site’s primary potentially responsible party (PRP), other industrial and manufacturing facilities located along the shore or tributaries to the lake are sources of contamination to the lake. Site investigations and cleanup activities are ongoing. EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in December 1994. Controlling the contamination migrating to Onondaga Lake from the various upland sites is an essential part of the overall cleanup of the lake. To facilitate coordination of the various investigations and cleanup activities at the lake and the upland sources, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and the EPA have, to date, identified 11 subsites of the Onondaga Lake site:  Lake Bottom (including Geddes Brook/Ninemile Creek); GM-IFG; LCP Bridge Street; Ley Creek PCB Dredgings; Lower Ley Creek; National Grid - Hiawatha Boulevard; Semet Tar Beds; Town of Salina Landfill; Wastebeds 1-8; Wastebed B/Harbor Brook, and Willis Avenue. New York State has the lead role in investigating and selecting cleanup plans for all the subsites except for Lower Ley Creek and the creek sediment and floodplain soil portion of the GM-IFG subsite.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Interim Remedial Measures (IRMs): Potentially responsible parties (PRPs) are the parties who EPA has determined may be legally responsible for site contamination. The PRPs have performed several interim cleanup actions, called IRMs, to address contamination at the various subsites under enforcement agreements between the PRPs and the State of New York. An IRM is any short-term, temporary or preliminary construction or activity that addresses contamination before a final cleanup decision is made. These actions have included removing chlorobenzene from existing wells; altering existing on-site sewers; demolishing on-site structures; removing, decontaminating and recycling former mercury cell processing buildings and building materials; cleaning storm drainage systems; investigating berms surrounding residue ponds; designing and constructing a lakeshore barrier wall and groundwater collection/treatment system; removing contaminated sediment and floodplain soil; addressing contaminated groundwater; installing a low permeability landfill cover; and conducting vapor intrusion mitigation.  Long-Term Cleanup: The site’s PRPs are performing investigations and cleanup actions at the various subsites under enforcement agreements between the PRPs and the State of New York. EPA contributed over $16.5 million to the State of New York for various activities at the site, such as performing investigations, coordinating and managing subsites, implementing a citizen involvement plan, creating a site-wide database, and establishing a comprehensive enforcement program. Between 1998 and 2019, cleanup plans were selected for portions of all of the subsites. Elements of the selected cleanups include dredging contaminated sediment, excavating contaminated soil, treating contaminated material (in place, and on and off site), collecting and treating contaminated groundwater, and capping contaminated soil and sediment. New York State is the lead agency for the investigation and cleanup of all of the subsites except for Lower Ley Creek and the creek sediment and floodplain soil portion of the General Motors - Inland Fisher Guide subsite. The status of the cleanup of the subsites can be found below. Lake Bottom Subsite: NYSDEC and EPA selected a cleanup plan in 2005 which called for dredging and capping of contaminated sediment. The dredging, which was conducted from 2012 to 2014, removed approximately 2.2 million cubic yards of contaminated sediment from the lake bottom and three shoreline areas. Capping, which included placing more than three million cubic yards of material consisting primarily of sand, activated carbon, siderite (iron ore), and stone, was completed in 2016.  Habitat restoration activities, including improving wetlands and planting native plants, shrubs, and trees in shoreline areas, were completed in late 2017. The dredging, capping, and habitat restoration work was performed by Honeywell International, the PRP, under the oversight of NYSDEC, EPA, and the New York State Department of Health, Semet Residue Ponds Subsite: NYSDEC and EPA selected a cleanup plan in 2002 for a portion of the Semet Residue Ponds subsite. The cleanup plan addressed the contaminated material present in the ponds and the groundwater. The groundwater portion of the cleanup was completed in 2013. A key element of the selected cleanup was the reuse of the Semet residue. Specifically, the Semet residue was to be excavated, dewatered and then thermally (heat) processed on-site to produce a soft tar product (RT-12) that would be further processed off-site to make a driveway sealer. After issuing the decision document, changes in market conditions made it no longer feasible to produce RT-12 from the Semet residue. In addition, supplemental investigations showed that there was much less Semet residue present in the ponds than was previously thought. Because of the changed market conditions, and based on the new residue quantity estimates, studies were conducted to identify and evaluate alternative approaches. A Focused Feasibility Study was prepared to evaluate off-site thermal processing/reuse of the Semet residue as an alternative. These documents demonstrated that off-site thermal processing was the best way to address the Semet residue. This change to the original cleanup plan was documented in a 2017 ESD). As part of a demonstration program, which began in 2014, and consistent with the ESD, Honeywell International, the PRP, removed the tar material and transported it off-site to a thermal processing facility (cement kiln) for beneficial reuse.  Consistent with a cleanup plan issued by NYSDEC and EPA in 2019, areas beneath the tar ponds were treated in-situ, or in place, and cover material was placed on top. Cover material was placed over other areas of the subsite as well, in accordance with the 2019 cleanup plan. This work was completed in 2020. LCP Bridge Street Subsite: The cleanup of the LCP Bridge Street subsite, one of two primary sources of mercury entering the lake, was completed by Honeywell International, the PRP, in 2015. Geddes Brook/Ninemile Creek Subsite: Cleanup activities for the Geddes Brook/Ninemile Creek subsite, which was impacted by contaminated sources at the LCP Bridge Street subsite, were completed by Honeywell International in 2014. Wastebeds 1-8 Subsite: An IRM to prevent contaminated water from migrating offsite and to prevent further erosion of Solvay waste along the shoreline of the Wastebeds 1-8 subsite began in 2013. NYSDEC and EPA issued a cleanup plan for a portion of the Wastebeds 1-8 subsite, which includes Solvay waste and contaminated soil/fill material, in 2014. The cleanup plan consists of placing a two-foot-thick soil cover over areas where active recreation is planned, or where appropriate, to protect ecological resources, and a one-foot-thick soil cover where passive recreation is planned. The cover was installed by Honeywell International, the PRP, in multiple phases due to a number of considerations/limitations including availability of cover material, optimal planting season for establishing vegetation, and use of the site by the property owners. The effort was completed in 2022.  Wastebed B/Harbor Brook Subsite: NYSDEC and EPA selected a cleanup plan for the Wastebed B/Harbor Brook subsite in 2018. The cleanup plan includes installing a cover system that will be protective for current and/or reasonably anticipated future land uses (e.g., active and passive recreational uses); planting vegetation; constructing/restoring wetlands with a low permeability cover; continuing operation and maintenance (O&M) activities associated with previously implemented IRMs; and establishing institutional controls at the subsite. Construction activities related to the 2018 cleanup plan were completed by Honeywell International, the PRP, in September 2022. In March 2023, NYSDEC and EPA selected a cleanup plan for the SYW-12 site, a portion of the Wastebed B/Harbor Brook subsite. Willis Avenue Subsite: NYSDEC and EPA issued a cleanup plan for the Willis Avenue subsite in 2019. The selected cleanup includes installing a one-foot thick cover, treating (in place) and/or removing mercury hot spots, targeted shallow/intermediate groundwater hydraulic control, evaluating and recovering/treating separate phase liquids (if present), continued operation and maintenance of the interim cleanup actions that have been implemented at the subsite, and monitored natural attenuation of shallow/intermediate groundwater.  Natural attenuation relies on natural processes to decrease or “attenuate” concentrations of contaminants in soil and groundwater. General Motors -- Inland Fisher Guide Subsite: The GM-IFG subsite includes two parts: 1) the former GM-IFG Syracuse plant property that is located south of Ley Creek on Townline Road in the town of Salina and the underlying and downgradient groundwater and 2) Ley Creek channel sediment, surface water, and floodplain soil/sediment in the reach from Townline Road to the Route 11 bridge. GM filed for bankruptcy in 2009. The Revitalizing Auto Communities Environmental Response Trust (RACER) took over the investigation and cleanup of the subsite from GM in 2011.   NYSDEC and EPA selected a cleanup plan for Ley Creek channel sediment, surface water, and floodplain soil/sediment (Ley Creek Deferred Media) in 2015. The cleanup plan called for removing sediment and soil contaminated with PCBs and metals. The selected cleanup also included replacing the excavated soil with backfill and transporting and disposing of the excavated soil at a regulated landfill facility off-site. NYSDEC and EPA estimated that 15,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil would need to be dug up and properly disposed of at a licensed facility at a cost of $7.6 million.  However, when more extensive soil sampling was conducated by RACER during the design of the cleanup plan, the soil contamination was found to be much more widespread than originally estimated.  As a result, seven cleanup alternatives, including the original plan, were evaluated and it was determined that the original cleanup plan, with certain changes, was appropriate. NYSDEC and EPA issued an ESD in September 2022 to document the changes. Specifically, the estimated volume of contaminated soil requiring excavation and off-site disposal increased from 15,000 cubic yards to approximately 64,000 cubic yards, excluding contamination in an area of mature tree growth which is located mostly to the north of Ley Creek toward the Townline Road end of the reach of Ley Creek between Townline Road and Route 11. The forested area was given special consideration as an ecological resource. At that time, the forested area was being evaluated for an in-situ (or in-place) cleanup approach. The estimated cost for this portion of the remedy increased from $7.6 million to $44.5 million. EPA and NYSDEC determined that the in-situ treatment will not be an effective cleanup method in the forested area and issued an additional ESD in April 2023, confirming that the soil cleanup approach selected in the original plan remains most suitable for the forested area. As described in the 2023 ESD, EPA will excavate and dispose of approximately 80,000 cubic yards of additional contaminated soil within a 13.9 acre-forested area. The additional volume of the cleanup in the forested area increases the cost of the cleanup by $55 million. RACER completed soil cleanup in the residential area in 2018 and several other areas in 2019. In September 2023, NYSDEC and EPA issued a ROD that describes the cleanup plan for the contaminated soil/fill material, groundwater, and soil vapor at the former plant property and groundwater portion of the GM-IFG subsite. The cleanup plan includes excavating contaminated soil and disposing it off-site; installing deep groundwater extraction wells along the northern edge of the property to collect and treat groundwater; treating contaminated groundwater at the existing on-site treatment system before discharging it to Ley Creek, and using in-place (in-situ) treatment to address volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in groundwater in three areas. The plan will also evaluate the existing sub-slab depressurization system to see if enhancements could be made to improve the removal of VOC contamination from beneath the on-site building. Sub-slab depressurization systems are used to prevent soil gases from infiltrating buildings. The cleanup plan requires the development of a site management plan for the long-term operation and maintainance of all of the site systems. Maintenance of the existing environmental easement will continue as an institutional control. Ley Creek PCB Dredgings Subsite: The cleanup at the Ley Creek PCB Dredgings Ssubsite, performed by GM, was completed in 2000. RACER is performing long-term maintenance and monitoring. Contaminated groundwater at this subsite will be addressed under the GM-IFG subsite. Salina Landfill Subsite: Consistent with a NYSDEC and EPA 2007 ROD and 2010 ROD amendment, waste from the landfill area located south of Ley Creek was combined with the landfill waste on the northern side of Ley Creek in 2011. Construction of a 50-acre landfill capping system and a groundwater-collection trench north of Ley Creek was completed by the town of Salina, the PRP, in 2013. Construction and startup of the on-site leachate treatment system, which is a system designed to collect and treat contaminated liquids, was completed in 2015. Niagara-Mohawk Hiawatha Boulevard Subsite: NYSDEC and EPA issued a cleanup plan for the Niagara-Mohawk Hiawatha Boulevard subsite in 2010. The selected cleanup called for solidifying in place the contaminated soil in the northeastern portion of the subsite that could leach contaminants to groundwater and treating groundwater along the northern perimeter of the subsite using enhanced bioremediation. Bioremediation uses microbes to clean up contaminated soil and groundwater. The soil solidification portion of the cleanup was completed in 2014. Construction of the groundwater component of the cleanup was completed in 2018. National Grid, the PRP, performed this work. Lower Ley Creek Subsite: In 2014, EPA finalized its plan to clean up contaminated soil and sediment at the Lower Ley Creek subsite, located in the city of Syracuse and town of Salina. The cleanup will include excavating and capping contaminated soil and sediment in Lower Ley Creek and disposing of the excavated soil and sediment. The design plan for the cleanup is currently being developed by the PRPs. More information about the status of the cleanup of the subsites can be found on NYSDEC's Region 7 Project Information webpage.Exit
What Is the Current Site Status?
Long-term maintenance and monitoring activities are ongoing.at the Lake Bottom, Semet Residue Ponds, LCP Bridge Street, Geddes Brook/Ninemile Creek, Wastebeds 1-8, Wastebed B/Harbor Brook, Ley Creek PCB Dredgings, Salina Landfill, and Niagara-Mohawk Hiawatha Boulevard subsites. The following are other ongoing actions: General Motors – Inland Fisher Guide Subsite:  In September 2023, NYSDEC and EPA issued a ROD that describes the cleanup plan for the former plant property and groundwater portion of the GM-IFG subsite. Because RACER does not have sufficient funds to perform the construction of the remedy, NYSDEC and RACER are negotiating an agreement under which RACER will provide funds to NYSDEC for its performance of the predesign investigation and design work using its own contractors. NYSDEC will perform the construction. The final design for addressing the contaminated floodplain soils and sediments at the Ley Creek Deferred Media portion of the GM-IFG subsite, prepared by RACER, was approved EPA in May 2024. Because RACER does not have sufficient funds to perform the construction of the remedy, EPA will perform the work. EPA provided $23 million in federal funding to begin the cleanup of the contaminated sediment and floodplain soil in the upper portion of Ley Creek  In addition, $7 million from an Onondaga Lake site-related bankruptcy settlement will be used.   It is anticipated that construction will start in spring 2025 and will take three to four years to complete.  Lower Ley Creek:  The PRPs are currently working on the design plan for the cleanup under an enforcement agreement with EPA. The 60% design of the selected remedy was approved in May 2024. It is anticipated that the 95% design will be submitted in fall 2024.
Wastebeds 1-8 Subsite: An investigation related to the impacted shallow, intermediate, and deep groundwater is currently being performed by Honeywell International, the PRP. Wastebed B/Harbor Brook Subsite:   Negotiations for the performance of the design and construction of the selected cleanup plan for the SYW-12 site are underway. Willis Avenue Subsite: NYSDEC and EPA have approved the design plan and construction work plan for the cleanup. A treatability study to evaluate the in-situ, or in place, treatment of mercury hot spots and the design of the cleanup is in progress. Treatability studies provide valuable site-specific data necessary to aid in screening, selecting, and implementing a site cleanup. Completion of the treatability study is anticipated in summer 2024. Five-Year Reviews: The purpose of five-year reviews is to ensure that implemented cleanup plans at Superfund sites function as intended and continue to protect public health and the environment. See "Announcements and Key Topics" for a summary of the five-year reviews that have recently been performed for the various subsites.
