Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Applied Environmental Services site, also known as the Shore Realty site, is located in Glenwood Landing, New York. Petrochemical facility operations contaminated site soil and groundwater. Short-term cleanups, also known as removal actions, included drum and fencing removal and liquid waste collection. Long-term cleanup – soil vapor extraction for contaminated soils and a pump-and-treat system with bioremediation for contaminated groundwater – is ongoing. Applied Environmental Services recovered fuels from hazardous wastes at this 4-acre site in Glenwood Landing from 1980 to 1983. The property contained two 1-story buildings, 7 underground tanks, and 11 aboveground tanks. Although all the tanks and the liquid chemicals stored in the tanks have been removed from the site - spills, leaks, and other activities resulted in on-site soil and groundwater contamination. Shore Realty purchased the property in 1983 and evicted Applied Environmental Services in January 1984. The site has been inactive since. It is fenced and access is controlled. Prior to 1980, the site was leased and operated by a petrochemical company; several spills occurred during its tenure, including about 3,000 gallons of the volatile organic compound (VOC) toluene from an overturned tank trailer. The site is on the north shore of Long Island. It slopes down to Hempstead Harbor on the west and Motts Cove on the south. A fuel oil distributor, power plant, and public boat landing lie to the north, and there is a private yacht club to the east. Approximately 7,600 people live within a mile of the site. Homes lie 500 feet to the south, 800 feet to the north, and 1,500 feet west of the site. An estimated 20,000 people within 3 miles of the site use groundwater as a drinking water source. In regard to Site Responsibility, this site is being addressed through a combination of Federal, State, and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. An Administrative Consent Order was signed in October 1987 for the current site owner to conduct a study of the nature and extent of contamination at the site. A Consent Judgment for design and construction of the selected remedy was signed and became effective on August 5, 1992. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 1994, during construction of the remedy, approximately 14 tons of contaminated sludge and 870 tons of building debris were transported off-site for proper disposal; two 700,000-gallon underground tanks containing 3,200 gallons of flammable liquids were removed and transported off-site for proper disposal. The ongoing operation of the soil vapor extraction and groundwater pump and treat systems will further reduce any potential threat to human health and the environment. In February 2004, the PRP’s contractors installed a steel bulkhead along the eastern boundary of Hempstead Harbor. Evaluation of the analytical results over time reported in the monthly and quarterly reports prepared by the PRP’s contractors indicate that concentrations of contaminants of concern have decreased significantly in the area of the former tank farm and in parts of the paved driveway. This is an indication that the remediation of soil and groundwater has been effective in these areas. In June 2009, the groundwater treatment system was converted from air stripping to liquid-phase granular activated carbon (GAC) stripping. The soil vapor extraction system was converted from catalytic oxidation to vapor-phase GAC stripping. These changes were made to maximize the system’s efficiency and effectiveness. The site’s operation and maintenance of the system has been transferred to New York State In December 2004, the PRPs upgraded and expanded the existing air sparging/soil vapor extraction system to address these areas of soil contamination. More recently, in 2009, as a response to the PRPs request for site closure due to asymptotic contaminant removal, EPA and DEC provided the Performing Parties Group (PPG) some recommendations to evaluate and analyze the effectiveness of the remedial system. A Remedial System Effectiveness Evaluation Report was submitted and reviewed. Additional recommendations were provided to the PPG to try to optimize the current treatment system in 2011 and a Remedial System Optimization Plan was finalized which included the installation and connection of three (3) new extraction wells to the remedial system (two in the immediate area of an existing groundwater recovery well and the third at an additional known hot spot); discontinuation of pumping of “clean” wells; pulse operation (cyclic on-off operation) of the remedial system; and changes to the Site monitoring program. The recommendations have been implemented and the data is under review. The fifth Five-Year Review for the site was completed in December 2020. Since New York State has taken over the site from the PRPs, they have conducted a limited soil investigation to identify any remaining hot spots. New York State has also conducted excavation activities to address the hot spot contamination found in early 2022.  It is anticipated that the limited soil excavation will further improve groundwater concentrations. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is being addressed in two stages: immediate actions and a long-term remedial phase directed at cleanup of the entire site. After toluene began seeping into Hempstead Harbor, Applied Environmental Services installed a trench that recovered an average of 500 gallons of organic chemicals each month. The site owner removed some of the drums from the site in 1984 and funded the further removal of 218 drums in 1985; the State supervised these activities. In October 1985, the State began to remove about 600,000 gallons of wastes from the on-site tanks. The work was completed a year later. The drum removal activities, fencing, and liquid waste collection efforts have greatly reduced the potential for exposure to hazardous materials at the Applied Environmental Services site. In 1987, under State supervision, the current owner began an intensive study of pollution at the site. As a result of the investigation, recommendations were made for cleanup strategies. The recommendations were made available for public comment in Spring 1991. The EPA and the State selected the site remedy, which was documented in the June 24, 1991 Record of Decision (ROD). It includes soil vapor extraction for the unsaturated contaminated soils and groundwater pump and treat, with bioremediation for the groundwater. The engineering design for the cleanup was completed in the Spring of 1994. Construction of the remedy started in May 1994 and was completed in June 1995. The system is currently being operated and maintained by the PRPs. A new steel bulkhead was installed on Hempstead Harbor in early 2003. Also, an upgrade of the air sparge/soil vapor extraction system in the lower asphalt area adjacent to the new bulkhead was completed in June 2005. Optimization efforts are underway in an effort to capture and treat more groundwater contamination. Additonally, a limited soil excavation was conducted﻿ in early 2022 to cleanup the remaining hot spots on the property. Top of Page