BIOCLINICAL LABORATORIES, INC.BOHEMIA, NY 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
 The Bioclinical Laboratories (BCL) site, located at 1585 Smithtown Avenue in Bohemia is a rental property within a 10-unit, single-story building on a 2.6 acre paved lot. BCL formulated, mixed, repackaged, and distributed chemicals from 1978 to 1981. Operators stored drums of hazardous wastes on-site, some of which leaked. BCL formulated and repackaged industrial chemicals. Another tenant Panatone Finishing Corp., prepared and applied finishing coatings to metal products. Hazardous materials were disposed of 1) in on-site septic systems which contaminated the groundwater and, 2) through surface runoff which contaminated surface and subsurface soil. When washing chemically-contaminated containers for reuse, workers routinely poured rinse water directly onto the ground or discharged it to sinks, a septic tank/distribution pool, and storm drains. These structures were sampled when citizen concerns prompted an investigation by the Suffolk County Department of Health Services (SCDHS) in 1981. SCDHS discovered a range of organic contaminants, including solvents, in the sanitary systems. In July 1981, a fire at the site destroyed much of BCL's inventory. Following removal of fire-damaged containers and industrial wastes from the facility’s sanitary systems, EPA determined that no further cleanup was required. BCL reincorporated its operations at another location in Bohemia. The site lies in an industrial setting in a major suburban area of Long Island. Municipal and private wells downgradient of the site serve 10,000 residents. EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in September 1994. Site Responsibility: This site was addressed through Federal and local actions. This is an EPA-lead site. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In November 1981, SCDHS issued an order to BCL, requiring removal of all fire-damaged containers and all industrial wastes from the sanitary system. It also required the owner to prepare and submit a plan for installing on-site monitoring wells to detect any contamination in groundwater. BCL removed all chemicals and pumped the wastewater system clean but did not install the wells. EPA installed monitoring wells during its investigation. As a result of these cleanup actions, EPA issued a No Further Action ROD on June 30, 1992 when it determined that no further actions were required to protect public health or the environment. The site was deleted from the NPL on September 9, 1994, and no longer poses a threat to human health and the environment. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site was addressed in a single, long-term remedial phase focused on cleanup of the entire site.Long-term Cleanup: In 1988, EPA started studies to explore the nature and extent of contamination at the site. Sampling of two sanitary systems on site by the Suffolk County Department of Health Services (SCDHS) in the fall of 1991 found no contamination in the east sanitary system and some contamination of the west sanitary system. The property owner and tenant cleaned up the west sanitary system. Analyses of groundwater, soil and septic tanks revealed low levels of contamination. Following cleanup, EPA selected "no further action" for the site’s remedy in 1992.
Top of Page