Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Copley Square Plaza Superfund site is located at 2777 and 2799 Copley Road in Copley Township, Summit County, Ohio. Investigations found volatile organic compounds (chemicals that vaporize easily into the air) were contaminating groundwater, with a former dry-cleaning business as the likely source. The main contaminant of concern was tetrachloroethene, commonly known as PERC. In 1994, EPA tested nearby homes, installed water treatment systems in seven homes with contaminated wells, closed eight wastewater tanks at the dry cleaners, and installed a trench drain system to collect the groundwater right behind the building. Ohio EPA maintained the water treatment systems until fall 2012, when 23 homes were connected to the Akron public water supply. 
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Cleanup of the shallow groundwater and the source of the contamination, referred to as Operable Unit 1, consisted of:
connecting some homes to municipal water
installing vapor intrusion systems in some homes
injecting a mixture of chemicals and microorganisms into the shallow groundwater aquifer to help break down contamination
Cleanup of the intermediate and deep groundwater contamination, referred to as Operable Unit 2, consists of:
injecting chemicals and microorganisms into the intermediate and deep groundwater aquifers to help break the contamination
monitoring the groundwater to measure the success of the cleanup
restricting use of the groundwater for drinking or other purposes until safe cleanup levels are reached.
Seven homes were provided with water treatment systems in the mid-1990s to address contaminated wells. A few years later, one home decided to connect to public water instead of having the filtration system.  Ohio EPA had been maintaining the systems since their installation.  In 2012, the remaining six homes with filtration systems, as well as 17 other homes, received connection to public water. 

What Is the Current Site Status?
E﻿PA is doing a status review of the cleanup. This type of review is required at least every five years where the cleanup is in progress and/or complete and hazardous waste remains managed on-site. These reviews are done to ensure the cleanup continues to protect people and the environment. This is the second five-year review of the cleanup selected for shallow groundwater contaminated by a former dry-cleaning operation. Contact the site community involvement coordinator or the remedial project manager to provide input. The review will include:
An evaluation of background information
A summary of cleanup requirements
A report on the effectiveness of the cleanup and any anticipated future actions
An analysis of ways for EPA to operate more efficiently
The previous five-year review found the cleanup of soil and shallow groundwater is protecting people and the environment in the short term and will be protective in the long term once groundwater cleanup goals are met and site controls are implemented. More information is being collected for the deeper groundwater aquifers. A report, which will be available in August 2021, will detail the site's progress. Quarterly groundwater monitoring resumed in 2018 to inform EPA of the shallow groundwater cleanup progress.  It will also help with the cleanup design of the deeper groundwater aquifers. EPA hopes to complete the design by fall 2021 and begin this cleanup in 2022.  It will involve in-place injection of compounds into the intermediate and deep groundwater aquifers and render the contaminants harmless.  Another option is to do a third round of injection into the shallow groundwater in fall 2020. This injection will continue to clean up all three aquifers while EPA completes the deeper groundwater cleanup design. The same cleanup was previously used in the shallow groundwater aquifer that was performed in 2013 and again in 2017.  The Agency will continue to monitor the shallow, intermediate and deep groundwater quarterly until December 2023 when Ohio EPA will take over the operation and maintenance of the cleanup. The 2018 vapor tests showed the vapor removal systems are working, and that the shallow groundwater cleanup injections done in 2013 and 2017 have reduced the concentration of dry-cleaning chemicals in shallow groundwater by 92 percent. About 99 percent of PERC and its derivatives have been cleaned up from the shallow aquifer. Remaining groundwater cleanup may take as few as 10 years to meet EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act standards called Maximum Contaminant Levels, or MCLs. 
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls, or ICs, are not yet in place.  EPA estimates that ICs will be in place by December 2024.  ICs will prevent groundwater use until the dry-cleaning chemicals are cleaned up to or below MCLs.  When MCLs  for the dry-cleaning chemicals have been met, there will no longer be any need for groundwater-use restrictions.  Another IC will prevent modification to or destruction of EPA’s groundwater-monitoring wells. ICs typically  play an important role in cleanups because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use or specifically groundwater-aquifer use at Copley Square. They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are inconsistent with the level of cleanup. For more background, see Institutional Controls. Homes have been connected to a public water supply.  Drilling drinking water and water production wells is limited in Copley Township.  Once all groundwater aquifers have been cleaned up, EPA will no longer require groundwater-use restrictions. However, EPA will probably maintain the existing groundwater monitoring well network for several years after the cleanup has been completed to ensure that all dry-cleaning chemicals have been removed from the aquifers. The soil cleanup is complete, and no land-use restrictions apply.  Development at the northern end of the Meadow Run townhome complex is underway. The Copley Square Plaza buildings are occupied by multiple tenants.  EPA recommends that they connect to the public water supply until the groundwater cleanup is completed. Otherwise, there are no other use restrictions.
