ARMCO INCORPORATION-HAMILTON PLANTHAMILTON, OH
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Armco Incorporation – Hamilton Plant site covers about 252 acres and is in the village of New Miami. The site is divided in two properties by Augspurger Road. One property is located north of Augspurger Road and the other one is located south of it. A steel mill  started operating on site around 1900 and changed ownership several times. The facility is bordered to the south and east by the Great Miami River. Armco (American Rolling Mills Co.) purchased the site from Hamilton Coke and Iron Co. in 1937. Operations ceased during the 1980’s with most of the structures being demolished by 1989. AK Steel Corp., now owned by Cleveland-Cliffs Inc., was a general partner of Armco and is the current owner of the site. Facility operations, including waste disposal, contaminated the site with hazardous chemicals.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed by the potentially responsible party (PRP) with the oversight of EPA (lead agency) and Ohio EPA (support agency). All waste piles on site were removed from the site during the late 1980s and early 1990s. In the late 1980s EPA inspected the property and took samples of soil, sediment, sludge piles, settling ponds and ground water, and also sampled drinking water wells in the area. The results of this sampling revealed contamination in on-site sediment, sludge piles and settling ponds. No contaminants were detected at unsafe levels in any of the drinking water wells. EPA sampling was also done at the site in 1993 and showed the presence of contaminants in on-site soil, waste, and sediment. Three monitoring wells were installed in the southern portion of the site in 1999. The wells were checked, and no dangerous levels of pollution were found. However, the wells, all at the south end of the site, were drilled to a depth of around 100 feet and would not capture contaminants located closer to the surface or pollution in the northern part of the site. In 2002 EPA and AK Steel Corp. entered into a legal agreement, known as an Administrative Order on Consent for remedial investigation costs performed at the site.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The property owner, Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. is conducting an investigation under EPA’s oversight to determine how far contamination at the site may have spread and whether people and the environment have been affected.  Information gathered by Cleveland-Cliffs will be detailed in a document called a remedial investigation report. The next step in the process will be to develop a feasibility study to consider cleanup alternatives for the site. Before a decision on how to clean up the site is made, EPA will develop a "proposed plan" to explain its recommendations, hold a public comment period, and offer to host a public meeting in the New Miami/ Hamilton area.
