PRISTINE, INC.READING, OH
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 3-acre Pristine, Inc. site is in Reading, Ohio. A former liquid waste disposal facility operated on site from 1974 to 1981. Prior to this, the facility was used to make sulfuric acid. The owners obtained a permit in 1977 to convert the facility into a hazardous waste incinerator. Due to numerous permit violations, Ohio EPA closed the facility in 1981. Facility operations contaminated soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. In September 1983 the site was added into the National Priorities List (NPL).
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 1984, EPA initiated a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) to define the extent and nature of the contamination at the site and to evaluate different cleanup alternatives. In December 1987, EPA issued a Record of Decision (ROD) with a selected remedy to address soil and groundwater contamination. In March 1990, EPA issued a ROD Amendment to document modification of the remedy. U.S. EPA’s cleanup at the site consisted of placing a cover over the site, conducting thermal soil treatment, installing a groundwater pumping and treating system, long-term monitoring, and limiting the use of and access to the site.

What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is being addressed through federal and state oversight of potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies function as intended by site decision documents. EPA completed the sixth five-year review (PDF) (186 pp, 14.59MB, About PDF) of the site in July 2021. The review concluded that the remedy at the site continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short-term, but additional data needs to be collected to ensure the remedy is protective in the long-term. The data and actions needed to ensure protectiveness in the long-term include:
Installing additional wells
performing more groundwater sampling
conducting soil gas and vapor intrusion investigations between the site and the former Cincinnati Drum Service property
sampling and analyzing wells for the chemical 1,4-dioxane
expanding sampling for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in the upper aquifer (underground layer of water)
confirming the groundwater flow direction in the upper aquifer
confirming the plume boundary
replacing key damaged monitoring points
evaluating water quality in the vicinity of the Magic Pit area, on the west side of the site  
conducting soil sampling at the site to identify potential remaining sources of groundwater contamination, and
identifying areas of interconnection between the upper and lower aquifers
