TRW, INC. (MINERVA PLANT)MINERVA, OH 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 135-acre TRW, Inc. site is in Minerva, Ohio and it includes a plant which formerly housed a metal casting operation. Past disposal practices associated with the facility were responsible for site contamination. Degreasers containing volatile organic compounds (VOCs) were used by the facility and discharged directly to a ditch which resulted in the contamination of soil and groundwater at the site. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were also used at the facility and contaminated soil and sediments. The TRW facility within the site property was sold in 1986 to another entity which produces aircraft components. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The remedy for contaminated soil and sediment at the site consists of a 3-acre containment cell. The remedy for contaminated groundwater is pumping and treatment. These remedial actions were conducted under two State of Ohio Consent Orders in 1985 and 1986. Construction of the containment cell was completed in 1986 and the pump and treat system was finished in 1987. The water treatment consists of air stripping with an effluent discharge under a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions, with oversight provided by Ohio EPA. Cleanup and monitoring at the site are ongoing. The site is in the Remedial Investigation (RI) phase. The RI serves as the mechanism for collecting data to characterize site conditions, determine the nature of the waste, assess risk to human health and the environment, and evaluate treatment technologies. RI tasks taking place at the site include soil and groundwater sampling, an evaluation of the groundwater pump and treat system, and human health and ecological risk assessments.     To date, groundwater contamination has not affected the Minerva well field, and groundwater contamination levels at the site have steadily decreased. Top of Page