FULTZ LANDFILLJACKSON TOWNSHIP, OH 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Fultz Landfill site is located in Jackson Township in Guernsey County, Ohio. From 1954 to 1985, residential, commercial, and industrial solid wastes were disposed of at the site. The landfill occupied approximately 30 acres of a 58-acre area. While the landfill was in operation, the owner was cited by county and state officials for multiple violations including inadequately controlling leachate (water escaping the landfill which, if not collected, may contaminate natural water sources) and accepting unauthorized drums of hazardous waste. In the early 1980s, leachate seeping from the landfill contained unacceptable levels of metals and phenolic compounds. As a result, in 1984 EPA placed the Fultz Landfill site on the National Priorities List, which is a roster of hazardous waste sites eligible for cleanup under the Superfund program. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. To determine the nature and extent of the contamination problems at the Fultz Landfill site, EPA began a Remedial Investigation in July 1985. EPA published the selected remedy for the site in the September 30, 1991 Record of Decision, or ROD. In May of 1995, EPA modified the ROD based on sampling and site studies during the remedial design phase in an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) document. The ESD required an on-site pump and treat system addressing groundwater contamination as a contingency remedy at the site. U.S. EPA’s cleanup at the site consisted of placing a berm and multilayer cap to reduce water infiltration and minimize contact with contaminated materials; establishing a leachate (landfill liquid) collection system; constructing an extraction well system to intercept contaminated groundwater; long-term monitoring; and limiting the use of and access to the site. Cleanup of the site was completed in 1998. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The Fultz Landfill site is in the operation and maintenance (O&M) phase. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. EPA is conducting the fifth five-year review of the site to verify the remedy continues to protect people and the environment. The five-year review is an opportunity for the public to tell EPA about site conditions and any concerns they may have. If you would like to submit any comments, please contact the Remedial Project Manager or Community Involvement Coordinator listed on this website. The previous five-year review in 2017 concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Compliance with Institutional Controls is necessary for the remedy to work properly. For this reason, long-term stewardship at the site is required. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Potentially Responsible Parties and EPA entered into a Consent Decree in June 1997 to clean up the site. In December 1997 an additional Consent Decree was signed between Armco Inc. and EPA. Top of Page