LAMMERS BARREL FACTORYBEAVERCREEK, OH
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Lammers Barrel Factory site is two and a half acres in size and is located at the northeast corner of the intersection of Grange-Hall and East Patterson Roads, in Beavercreek, Ohio. The site is bordered on the north by an abandoned railroad right-of-way and several industrial facilities. On the west, the site is bordered by Grange Hall Road, and on the south by East Patterson Road. Further to the south are a gas station, an automotive repair facility, and a residential area. To the southeast is a strip mall known as Woodhaven Shopping Center. To the east, the site is bordered by a parking lot and property owned by the Fraternal Order of Eagles. The nearest residences to the site are located approximately 400 feet away to the east and southeast. Little Beaver Creek flows from west to east across the site. The Kohnen and Lammers Chemical Company operated at the site as a chemical recycling facility from 1953 until 1969 when a fire caused the facility to close. Chlorinated volatile organic compounds and aromatic hydrocarbons chemicals were stored at the site in aboveground storage tanks, and in drums. In 1985 the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency discovered contamination in residential drinking water wells in the area while conducting groundwater sampling. Several properties with private wells in the area were connected to the public water supply because they were impacted by site’s contaminants. These properties included nine residential properties which the EPA connected to an 8-inch diameter water main along East Patterson Road in January of 1986, and four additional area residential properties that EPA connected to that same water main in February 2000. In 2002, U.S EPA proposed that the site be added to the National Priorities List, and a year later it became a Superfund Site.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible parties (PRPs) actions. In 2002, EPA signed an Administrative Order on Consent, which required the PRPs to conduct a Remedial Investigation (RI) and a Feasibility Study (FS) for the site. RIs are intended to gather the data necessary to determine the nature and extent of problems at the site, and identify preliminary alternative remedial actions for the site. The FS evaluates alternative remedial actions, and recommends a preferred remedial action. RI sampling was conducted at the site from the spring of 2003 to the spring of 2004. In addition, a supplemental investigation and Early Action Pilot Test (EAPT) was conducted at the site from 2004 to 2006. The RI Report was completed and approved by EPA in the fall of 2008. The FS Report was approved by EPA in June 2011. The RI/FS Report and the Proposed Cleanup Plan for the Lammers Barrel Site were made available to the public in early July 2011.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is divided in two areas, or Operable Units (OUs). OU1 is the former Lammers Facility itself, and OU2 is the offsite groundwater contamination. The groundwater plume migrates off site to the east, just north of East Patterson Road. OU1 is in the Remedial Design and Remedial Action (RD/RA) phase of the Superfund cleanup process, and OU2, the off-site groundwater contamination, is in the Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) phase. In September 2011, U.S. EPA selected cleanup remedies for the site. The selected remedy for impacted soils was in-situ biological treatment. The selected remedy for the groundwater was in-situ groundwater treatment using enhanced reductive dichlorination, or ERD. Institutional controls were also part of the overall remedy to prohibit development of the site for residential use and prohibit installation of drinking wells on the site. The U.S. EPA determined that the previous remedy for impacted soils, would require four times more soil to be treated than originally anticipated, making it more costly and difficult to implement. For this reason, the U.S. EPA issued a proposed cleanup plan change to OU1 in June 2023 that treats the soil with heat – either electric resistance heating or thermal conductive heating - to extract the contaminants. The proposed plan change fact sheet (PDF) (10 pp, 5.54 MB) summarized the plan and described cleanup options. In October 2023, the Record of Decision (ROD) Amendment (PDF) (54 pp, 10.43 MB) documented remedy change from soil mixing to thermal treatment was published. In March 2024 cleanup activities associated with the OU1 groundwater began on site by clearing some trees and shrubbery in areas where it is needed in preparation for removing groundwater contamination at the site. The following upcoming field activities at the former Lammers Barrel factory property are planned for April 2024:
Ending the use of monitoring wells within the thermal footprint.
Installing new monitoring wells and injection wells.
Completing the construction and delivery of the injection system.
The first round of groundwater monitoring is planned for May 2024 and the last one for December 2025. The first well injection round is planned for May 2024 and the last one for November 2025.
Enforcement Information
Potentially Responsible Parties and EPA entered legal agreements known as a Consent Decrees in April 2014 and July 2019 to clean up the site.
