Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
Protectiveness Statement
Compass Industries Superfund site (the site) fifth Five-Year Review: The remedy currently protects human health and the environment. Current Status The City of Sand Springs maintains the site and performs routine maintenance and sampling. The cleanup was completed in June 1991, and the site was removed from the National Priorities List on July 18, 2002. The Environmental Protection Agency and the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality will began activities related to the Five-Year Review (FYR) in July 2015. The previous FYR, completed in 2010, found that the selected remedy for the Site is currently performing as intended, and is considered protective of human health and the environment. Site Background Compass Industries Landfill is located in Tulsa County, Oklahoma. The abandoned facility, located in a former limestone quarry, was a municipal landfill between 1972 and the early 1980s. During operation, the landfill accepted about 620,000 cubic yards of solid, liquid and sludge wastes, including acids, caustics, solvents and potentially carcinogenic materials. Landfilling activities contaminated soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. Following cleanup, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 2002. Purpose and Process for Five-Year Review
The Five-Year Review (FYR) evaluates the implementation and performance of a remedy to determine continued protection of human health and the environment. The FYR report documents methods, findings and conclusions. In addition, it identifies any issues found during the review, and documents recommendations to address them. The EPA prepares FYRs pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability (CERCLA) Section 121, and the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). This is the fifth FYR for the Compass Industries Superfund site. 
The fifth FYR for the site was completed on March 25, 2016. The EPA concluded that the exposure assumptions, toxicity data, cleanup levels and remedial action objectives used at the time of the remedy selection are still valid. No additional criterion was identified to dispute the protectiveness of the remedy. 
Recommendations/Follow-up Actions
The FYR did not identify any issues that may affect long-term protectiveness of the current remedy. The next FYR will be completed by March 25, 2021. National Priorities List Proposal Date: September 8, 1983
Final Listing Date: September 21, 1984
Final Deletion Date: July 18, 2002 
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. The City of Sand Springs maintains the site and performs routine maintenance and sampling. In 2006, the site’s PRPs filed a deed notice with Tulsa County, restricting groundwater and land use at the site. 
The area was originally the location of a limestone quarry. Limestone from the site was used for cement and railroad ballast making as early as 1904. Quarry operations continued into the early 1960s. Aerial photography shows that quarrying operations had ceased by 1964, and waste dumping activities had begun. Between 1972 and 1976, a municipal solid waste landfill facility permitted by the Oklahoma State Department of Health (OSDH) operated on site. However, photographic evidence shows waste disposal and landfill activities continued into the 1980s. Disposal of industrial waste took place at the site, even though it was not allowed under landfill permit conditions or solid waste regulations. Several fires were reported at the landfill during the 1970s. Often these fires were the result of the spontaneous combustion of the waste materials and burned underground for extended periods. The area was originally the location of a limestone quarry. Limestone from the site was used for cement and railroad ballast making as early as 1904. Quarry operations continued into the early 1960s. Aerial photography shows that quarrying operations had ceased by 1964, and waste dumping activities had begun. Between 1972 and 1976, a municipal solid waste landfill facility permitted by the Oklahoma State Department of Health (OSDH) operated on site. However, photographic evidence shows waste disposal and landfill activities continued into the 1980s. Disposal of industrial waste took place at the site, even though it was not allowed under landfill permit conditions or solid waste regulations. Several fires were reported at the landfill during the 1970s. Often these fires were the result of the spontaneous combustion of the waste materials and burned underground for extended periods. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy included security fencing and signs to restrict site access; a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) cap involving site grading, cap placement, surface water diversions and air emissions monitoring; and groundwater treatment if necessary. Remedy construction took place between 1990 and 1992. Landfill seep monitoring, settlement surveys, landfill gas sampling, maintenance activities and surface water sampling are ongoing.Following cleanup, EPA took the site off the NPL in 2002.
Top of Page