CRYOCHEM, INC.WORMAN, PA 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 19-acre Cryochem, Inc. site is located in Boyertown, Pennsylvania. A metals fabrication facility has operated at the site since 1962. Operators used solvents to clean finished metal parts and disposed of excess solvents in the shop drain system. This drain system discharged into nearby surface waters. These activities contaminated soil, surface water and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. The site was added to the Superfund program's National Priorities List in October 1989. Following cleanup, operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. These actions were designed to supply clean drinking water to residents near the site and address groundwater and soil contamination at the site. The site’s long-term remedy included installation of point-of-entry drinking water filter units for affected homes and businesses, groundwater treatment and monitoring, and “no further action” for site soils. Construction of the remedy took place between 1993 and 1998. Groundwater treatment and monitoring are ongoing. Modifications to the remedial actions were issued through four Explanation of Significant Differences (ESDs) in 1994, 1998, 2004, and 2018. An ESD is issued when modifications to the remedy are necessary and significant but do not fundamentaly alter the remedy's scope, performance, or cost. The first and third ESD established the use of carbon filtration systems at residences as a final remedy to supply clean drinking water to residents. The second ESD stated that no further action was necessary to address soil contamination after investigations found the concentration of contaminants of concern was below the established target cleanup level. In September 2018, EPA issued the fourth ESD which focused on the site's groundwater contamination plume. Changes include:  
Implementation of institutional controls to ensure the long-term protectiveness of the cleanup. Institutional controls are administrative or legal controls to prevent potential for human exposure to contamination and/or protect the integrity of the remedy; 
Changes to the groundwater performance standards by changing the groundwater cleanup goals to current drinking water Maximum Contaminant Levels or Medium Specific Concentrations for each contaminant of concern; and
Requirement to perform a future cumulative risk assessment for contaminants of concern in groundwater once cleanup goals are achieved. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent, 2023 Five-Year Review (PDF), concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. EPA’s review found that the cleanup does not currently treat for the 1,4-dioxane and should be modified to treat for it. EPA continues to monitor residential well water at selected homes near the site. The purpose of this effort is to ensure those homes remain protected from site-related contaminants impacting thier potable water.   Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in place to protect well vaults and the treatment facility. Additional information about the institutional controls are available in the 2023 Five-Year Review (PDF) (page 10).  
Top of Page