METRO CONTAINER CORPORATIONTRAINER, PA 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Sampling and Monitoring
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Metro Container Site is located in an industrialized area about 20 miles southwest of Philadelphia in Trainer, Delaware County, Pennsylvania. The main portion of the site is comprised of a two adjacent properties totaling 10.4 acres located at the southwest corner of 2nd and Price Streets (the "Metro Property"). Surrounding the Metro Property are a petroleum refinery, auto salvage operation, metal scrap operation, and rail yard. Residential properties are located north of the Metro Property. The Metro Property is located adjacent to Stoney Creek, a small stream historically known as Middle Run or Stony Run. Stoney Creek is a tidally influenced tributary of the Delaware River, which is located approximately 1,000 feet south of the Metro Property. Various companies have occupied the site since the late 19th century, including the Delaware Oil Works, Manufacturers Paraffine Company, Stauffer Chemical Company, Joseph A. Reis Company, Universal Container Corporation, Metro Container Corporation, and Trainer Industries, LLC. Industrial activities including machine oil and paraffin wax refining, carbon disulfide manufacturing, and steel drum reconditioning occurred on the Metro Property. No industrial activities are currently conducted at the site. Trainer Industries, LLC, which is a party indemnified for past contamination under an agreement with EPA, currently owns the Metro Property. Service Painting, Inc. is an industrial painting business that uses the Metro Property to store supplies and perform sandblasting and painting. Soil and groundwater at the Metro Property is contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), inorganic elements, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Buried containment structures and piping systems used by past owner/operators contain sludges and non-aqueous phase liquids (NAPL) and in many areas remain connected to Stoney Creek. The site was added to the National Priorities List (NPL) in March 2012, making it eligible for long-term investigation and cleanup under the federal Superfund program. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 2015, EPA issued two separate Administrative Orders on Consent (AOCs) to a group of potentially responsible parties (PRPs). One AOC outlined the conditions for performance of the removal actions by PRPs, which were completed in late 2016. Under the conditions of the other AOC, the PRPs agreed to perform the Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) under EPA oversight. The PRPs continue to perform the RI/FS at OU1 under EPA oversight.  Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Preparation of the human health and ecological risk assessments, which is one of the final steps in the RI for OU1, is scheduled to begin in late 2023, followed by or performed concurrently with the FS. EPA will begin an RI/FS for OU2 in late 2023. In September 2013, EPA initiated a Time-Critical Removal Action at the Site.  Additional information regarding the Removal Action can be found at the EPA On-Scene Coordinator website for the Metro Container Corporation Site. The actions were conducted in two phases from 2013 through 2016.  Results and findings of these actions can be can be reviewed in Pollution Reports, or POLREPs. Current and future activities at the site are being performed by or under oversight of the EPA Superfund Remedial Program. Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
To date, sampling and monitoring has included: 
Investigation of soil and groundwater on the Metro property﻿;
Characterzation of sediment and ecological features in Stoney Creek;
Vapor Intrusion sampling at the site; and
Characterzation of off-site groundwater. 
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
The cleanup included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. Information regarding the removal a﻿ction can be found at the EPA On-Scene Coordinator website for the Metro Container Corporation Site. Top of Page