Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 28-acre Avco Lycoming Superfund Site, located in Williamsport, Lycoming County, PA, produced aircraft engines for over 50 years. Since the 1920s when the facility was purchased by AVCO Corporation, operations at the site have primarily been to manufacture and repair aircraft engines. The facility continues these productions today, and beginning in the 1950s, also functions as a waste treatment facility. Historic operations at the site contaminated the groundwater with volatile organic compounds and metals. Between 1989 and 1991, EPA conducted a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study at the site to determine the type and extent of contamination. The results of this study showed that both the shallow and deep aquifers were contaminated with trichloroethylene (TCE), dichloroethane (DCE), and vinyl chloride. However, the results also showed that the surface water quality of Lycoming Creek was not contaminated. EPA identified several contaminants, including TCE, DCE, vinyl chloride, manganese, chromium, and cadmium, in the groundwater as the focus for cleanup at the site. The Avco Lycoming Superfund Site was added to the National Priorities List on February 21, 1990. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 1985, prior to EPA’s involvement with the site, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP), ordered Avco Lycoming to complete a groundwater investigation and cleanup. The company complied with the order by evaluating the on- and off-site shallow groundwater contamination, installing and regularly sampling groundwater monitoring wells, and installing three on-site and two off-site recovery wells and treatment facilities. The Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study conducted between 1989 and 1991 identified all types, quantities, and locations of contaminants on site and develop strategies to address them. Based on the results of this study, EPA issued a Record of Decision (PFD) in 1991 calling for the contaminated shallow groundwater beneath the facility to be extracted, treated, and discharged to nearby Lycoming Creek. A 1985 Consent Order and Agreement between Avco Lycoming and PADEP was made to address the off-site contamination. In 1992, the Record of Decision was modified in an Explanation of Significant Differences (PDF) document. This document modified the original timeframe for the cleanup by specifying when the recovery well pumping would be discontinued, as well as redefined the area of attainment, which is the defined area where pollutant levels are below the federal health-based standards. A new Record of Decision was issued in 1996 to modify the shallow aquifer cleanup. This new decision document contained: 
Air sparging, which involves drilling an injection well into the groundwater-soaked soil and an air compressor at the surface to pump air underground through the wells. As air begins to bubble through the groundwater, it carries contaminated vapors upward into the soil and eventually above ground;
Soil vapor extraction following the air sparging to remove the contaminants in the toxic vapors;
In-situ metals precipitation by injecting molasses into the groundwater to naturally render the hexavalent chromium to become less toxic. 
The air sparging and soil vapor extraction cleanup methods were never used because the groundwater table was too high. EPA issued a Record of Decision amendment (PDF) in April 2000 to address three areas of concern regarding groundwater contamination: 
The shallow aquifer underneath the facility;
“Hot spots,” or areas of high levels of contamination, specifically in the east parking lot and central plant areas;
The shallow aquifer beyond the facility and the deep aquifer, also known as the bedrock aquifer, throughout the site. 
The construction and start of the pump-and-treat remedy to address groundwater beneath the facility was completed in 2001. Additional extraction wells were constructed in 2002 to help clean up the “hot spots.” By September 2002, EPA completed a Preliminary Close-Out Report and the first Five-Year Review. This Five-Year Review report concluded that the remedy was meeting performance requirements, however the groundwater should remain under constant monitoring as off-site groundwater remediation continues under the PADEP Consent Order and Agreement. After the second Five-Year Review in September 2007, EPA added some minor improvements to the groundwater treatment systems and required a vapor intrusion assessment. Vapor intrusion is when there is a migration of vapor-forming chemicals from subsurface sources, in this case groundwater, and moves into an overlying building via cracks in the foundation and openings for utility lines. The vapor intrusion sampling conducted at the site in the fall of 2010 concluded that there was no vapor intrusion issues at the site, but it could become an issue in the future. Additional sampling in the fall of 2011 identified one area of concern and the responsible party submitted a workplan to install vapor mitigation systems approved by EPA. The systems were installed in the affected homes and are continuing to operate properly. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
All the construction the Avco Lycoming Superfund Site was completed in September 2002. The groundwater is continuously pumped and treated to remove contamination, and the shallow and deep aquifer is monitored on an annual, semi-annual, or quarterly basis depending on the location of the monitoring well. Following the 2012 Five-Year Review of the site, EPA completed vapor intrusion remediation and sampling to ensure future protectiveness at the site. EPA issued an Explanation of Significant Differences (PDF) in 2012 to restrict the use of groundwater and the installation of new groundwater wells within and near the plume of contaminated groundwater. This Explanation of Significant Differences also added a risk-based cleanup standard to be evaluated after Maximum Contaminant Levels have been met. Maximum Contaminant Levels are the legal standards that are set by EPA for drinking water quality.   The Fifth Five-Year Review (PDF) was completed in September 2022. The findings show that the selected remedy is functioning as intended and remains protective of human health and the environment. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in place to limit the facility property to industrial use and prevent the installation of new groundwater wells within the groundwater plume. Additional information about the institutional controls is available in the 2022 Fifth Five-Year Review (PDF) (pages 11-13). Top of Page