RECTICON/ALLIED STEEL CORP.E COVENTRY TWP, PA 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
T﻿he 5-acre Recticon/Allied Steel Corp. Site is located in East Coventry Townships, Chester County, Pennsylvania. The site consists of two properties: the former Recticon facility and the Allied Steel Products Corporation facility. Recticon was a subsidiary of Rockwell International, manufacturers of silicon wafers from 1974 to 1981. Historical operations and spills at the site contaminated soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. EPA placed the site on the Superfund program's National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989. On December 15, 2017, EPA issued the Final Close Out Report for the site, documenting that all performance standards at the site have been achieved and that the Superfund cleanup is complete. The site was deleted from the NPL on September 14, 2018. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA selected a cleanup plan to address site contamination in a Record of Decision (ROD) in June 1993. EPA divided the work into components or operable units (OUs) to facilitate management of the remedial process.     OU1 – Water Line
Construction of a water line was completed between September 1998 through November 1999 and consisted of extending a water main to the site area and connecting 14 residences and businesses. Once the municipal water lines were connected, filtration systems previously used at the properties were no longer necessary. EPA performed the final inspection of the water line and connections in December 1999. OU2 - Soil 
EPA conducted a time-critical removal at the site in April 1998 after sampling indicated that the copper and zinc levels exceeded screening values, and that any terrestrial or aquatic receptors on or near the site would be exposed to unacceptable levels. Six inches of contaminated soil were excavated and removed from a small portion of the site known as the “crane area”. The area was backfilled with clean soil and grass was planted. The 1993 ROD also required the excavation of trichloroethylene (TCE) contaminated soils on the former Recticon facility. This requirement was modified by a 1997 ROD Amendment which changed the soil cleanup level. As a result of this change, no further soil excavation was required and institutional controls were instead required to prohibit soil excavation. A 2004 Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) subsequently eliminated the requirement for institutional controls for soil. OU3 - Groundwater
Construction of the groundwater portion of the remedy started in June 1998 and consisted of the installation of approximately 10 additional monitoring wells, an extraction well, and the construction of a groundwater extraction and treatment system. EPA conducted a pre-final inspection of OU3 in April 1999 and determined that Rockwell and its contractors had constructed the remedy in accordance with remedial design plans and specifications.  A pilot study from June 2001 to February 2007 was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of using enhanced bioremediation to treat groundwater contamination more effectively than groundwater extraction and treatment. The study consisted of the injection of non-toxic food-grade amendments and other approved supplements to the groundwater to enhance the natural biodegradation occurring at the site. The pilot study effectively reduced volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the groundwater close to groundwater cleanup levels. The 2010 ESD replaced the groundwater extraction and treatment portion of the site remedy with enhanced bioremediation. Groundwater VOC concentrations were found to be below cleanup levels in 2011. Twelve quarters of monitoring were subsequently performed, in accordance with the 1993 ROD, to confirm that the groundwater cleanup levels have been achieved. The cleanup of the Recticon/Allied Steel Superfund Site was completed with the issuance of the December 2017 Final Close Out Report. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent, 2015 Five-Year Review (PDF), concluded that the site is protective of human health and the environment. The clean-up objectives for the site have been accomplished. EPA will not conduct additional five-year reviews of the site since no waste was left in place and clean up objectives have been accomplished. EPA﻿ deleted the Recticon/Allied Steel Corp. Site from the Superfund National Priorities List on September 14, 2018. The rule document can be found in the Federal Register (Docket # EPA-HQ-SFUND-1989-0011). Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in place to restrict groundwater use. Additional information about the institutional controls is available in the 2015 Five-Year Review (PDF) (pages 8-9).
Top of Page
Emergency Response and Removal
Cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to ecological risk and human health and the environment. Prior to the extension of the public water line, a potentially responsible party supplied carbon units to residents whose wells were contaminated above acceptable levels. In addition, it was determined that terrestrial or aquatic receptors on or near the site would be exposed to unacceptable levels of copper and zinc contaminants. As a result, EPA conducted a time-critical removal at the site in April 1998. Six inches of contaminated soil were excavated and removed from a small portion of the site known as the “crane area”. The area was backfilled with clean soil and grass was planted. Top of Page