NORTH PENN - AREA 7NORTH WALES, PA
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The North Penn – Area 7 site is located in North Wales in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania and encompasses five former industrial facility properties:
The former Spra-Fin, Inc. property a metal manufacturing and finishing business.
The former Ford Electronics and Refrigeration Corp. property, which made electrical autoparts.
The former Teleflex, Inc. property a mechanical, electrical and pneumatic contro manufacturer for aircraft.
The former Leeds and Northrup, Inc. property, which made electronic instruments.
The former Zenith Electronic, Corp. property, which made television picture tubes.
Historical operations at these facilities contaminated groundwater primarily with volatile organic compounds, which were used in solvents or degreasers. EPA added the site to the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1989. 
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. The EPA has conducted studies of the nature and extent of contamination at the site. Contaminated groundwater has been the primary concern. Individual facilities have completed cleanups, including soil excavation, soil aeration, and pumping of contaminated wells:
EPA removed 3,897 cubic yards of TCE-contaminated soil from an area near a deteriorated tank on the Spra-Fin Inc. site.
As a result of a lawsuit filed against them by the North Penn Water Authority, all five facilities have agreed to finance the pumping and treating of groundwater to remove volatile organic compounds from public service well L-22.

What Is the Current Site Status?
North Penn – Area 7 is divided into four separate areas for purposes of cleanup:
Operable Unit 1 (OU1) is the soil contamination in four out of five properties that comprise the whole site. One of the potentially responsible parties (PRPs), Ford Motor Company, has completed a soil removal on one of these four properties. The Remedial Investigation has been completed on all the properties. EPA finalized the screening level Ecological Risk Assessment of terrestrial habitats, and the aquatic habitats baseline Ecological Risk Assessment. The Human Health Risk Assessments for each of the OU1 contaminant source properties have also been finalized. The PRPs developed a Feasibility Study, which was approved by EPA in 2019. EPA is working with one of the PRPs (Teleflex) to conduct a removal action of contaminated soils at the Former Teleflex Property. The removal action is expected to take place in Fall 2023.
Operable Unit 2 (OU2) is the soil contamination on the fifth property, Spra-Fin Inc. Soil cleanup was completed in 2011 by EPA.
Operable Unit 3 (OU3) is a site-wide groundwater investigation which was completed in July 2011. The Human Health Risk Assessment was completed in April 2012. In November 2012, EPA's contractor installed three new groundwater wells for use in the Feasibility Study's in-situ bio-remediation treatability pilot at theTeleflex Inc. property at 205 Church Rd, North Wales, PA. The three new wells, one of which will serve as a substrate injection well, join a comprehensive network of existing wells on the property. The pilot study which will examine the viability of remediating the Site's chlorinated VOC contaminated groundwater plumes through the use of in-situ bio-remediation. The first injection occurred in December 2013 and continued through 2015. The results of the pilot study have been incorporated and evaluated as a remedial alternative in the Site's groundwater Feasibility Study, which was approved in 2020. EPA is working to obtain a contractor to conduct a Focused Feasibility Study on OU3.
Operable Unit 4 (OU4) is a site-wide vapor intrusion study. The first round was completed in April 2011, and the results have been communicated to the property owners. A second round was performed in 2012 and a third round was conducted in early 2013. EPA has evaluated the data from the vapor intrusion sampling and has determined that there is no unacceptable risk level, meaning no action is required. EPA issued a No Action Record of Decision on September 12, 2019 documenting the findings of no unacceptable risks of vapor intrusion occuring at the NP7 Site.

Sampling and Monitoring
DRAFT Remedial Investigation OU3 SAMPLING RESULTS; Groundwater, Surface Water, Sediment Groundwater Sampling Results (Selected Properties)
205 Church Road (Draft RI OU3 Sampling Results) (PDF)
1180 Church Road (Draft RI OU3 Sampling Results) (PDF)
1190 Church Road (Draft RI OU3 Sampling Results) (PDF)
Former Leeds and Northrup R&D Facility and 351 Sumneytown Pike (Draft RI OU3 Sampling Results) (PDF)
177 Wissahickon Avenue (Draft RI OU3 Sampling Results) (PDF)
Surface Water and Sediment Sampling Results
TowamencinCreek (Draft RI OU3 Sampling Results) (PDF)
Wissahickon Creek (Draft RI OU3 Sampling Results) (PDF)
Enforcement Documents
Consent Decree - May 12, 2014 (PDF)
Maps
USGS Groundwater Contamination Plume Map (PDF)
Site Boundary Map of North Penn Area 7 OU3 (PDF)
(This is an approximate boundary and does not necessarily represent a final decision by EPA.)
