JACKSON CERAMIX, INCFALLS CREEK, PA 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Jackson Ceramix Superfund Site is located in Falls Creek, Pennsylvania. Between 1917 and 1985, a facility on-site manufactured and painted china. Site operations included the discharge of lead-contaminated wastewater into an unlined drainage ditch and lagoon on site. The lagoon drained contaminated sludge and wastewater into a wetland and floodplain next to Sandy Lick Creek. Facility operations also included stockpiling and burying broken and unfinished china debris. These activities contaminated soil, sediment, surface water and groundwater with metals and other organic compounds. In September 2005, the site was added to the Superfund program's National Priorities List, making it eligible for federal funding for cleanup. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In early 1989, EPA oversaw the excavation and removal of sludge from the lagoon area and contaminated material from the drainage ditch. The excavated lagoon area was backfilled with clean material, and an 80-foot section of pipe was installed to ensure proper drainage.  From 1998 to 1999, a two-phased interim response was conducted at the former manufacturing facility, under the direction of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP). The response included: 
removal and off-site disposal of asbestos-containing material
excavation and on-site treatment and stabilization of contaminated sludge and soil from 16 sumps, the drainage ditch, and the lagoon
removal and off-site disposal or on-site treatment and stabilization of waste in pits and septic tanks, ceramic manufacturing process materials, construction debris, and staging materials
demolition of two buildings, two kilns, two railroad cars, a chimney stack, and various other structures;
relocation of china waste and initial site grading
construction and re-vegetation of a soil cap over about 12 acres of the property—covering china waste. 
EPA conducted a remedial investigation (RI) to determine the nature and extent of contamination remaining at the site. Sampling activities using a phased approach between 2009 and 2015. The scope of field sampling was quite significant due to the large size of the site; approximately 1,200 samples of soil or sediment were collected from over 500 locations, and over 200 samples of groundwater were collected from over 85 sample locations that included groundwater monitoring wells, temporary wells and soil borings. Each sample was analyzed for multiple chemicals. The 2018 RI (PDF) report describes the nature and extent of site contamination and includes an assessment of human health and ecological risks posed by the site. The site has been subdivided into three portions or operable units (OUs). 
OU1: 37 acres of land affected by former manufacturing activities west of and including the Buffalo and Pittsburgh (B&P) rail line.OU1 has been further subdivided into the following areas of concern:
Former Manufacturing Area (FMA)
Baseball Field Area (BFA)
Northern Drainage Channel (NDC)
Former Sludge Settling Lagoon (FL)
OU2: Sandy Lick Creek floodplain
OU3: shallow and deep groundwater beneath OU1 and OU2 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA has identified the following contaminants in soils and sediments at operable unit 1 (OU1): lead, zinc, arsenic, manganese, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) such as trichloroethene (TCE), and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) compounds. In addition, VOCs can pose a concern via migration from soil into groundwater, and from subsurface vapor into potential future buildings. EPA issued a Proposed Plan for OU1 (PDF) in August 2020. OU1 is a cleanup priority due to interest in redeveloping this portion of the land. Cleanup plans for OU2 and OU3 will be proposed at a later date. EPA issued a Record of Decision for OU1 (PDF) in March 2021, in which the following alternatives were identified as the Selected Remedy for the Site: 
OU1 Former Manufacturing Area (FMA) - Alternative 2: Repair of the existing soil cover, In Situ Thermal Remediation, Institutional Controls (ICs)
OU1 Baseball Field Area (BFA) - Alternative 1: No Further Action
OU1 Northern Drainage Channel/Former Lagoon Area (NDC/FL) Alternative 4: In Situ Stabilization for NDC Surface Soils; Excavation with Ex Situ Stabilization and off-Site Disposal for FL Sediments and FL Subsurface Soil Hotspot; ICs. 
EPA completed two separate Remedial Design reports for the final remedial actions identified in the 2021 OU1 ROD. The first Remedial Design is for the In Situ Thermal Remediation of the VOC source area and the second Remedial Design covered the remaining work identified in the OU1 ROD, including repair of the existing soil cover, in situ stabilization of the Northern Drainage Channel, and the removal and treatment of high concentrations of lead in the Former Lagoon. Both Remedial Actions began in summer 2024 and are currently ongoing. EPA has also finalized a Focused Feasibility Study for OU2 (Sandy Lick Creek floodplain area) where remedial alternatives have been evaluated to address ceramic waste and elevated lead concentrations (identified as source material) in the 200-acre floodplain area. The Proposed Plan was released in November 2022 and identifies the the Preferred Alternative as Excavation of Source Material, Dredging of Sediments, Off-Site Disposal, and Wetlands Restoration. The ROD of issued in April 2023. Remedial Action is expected to begin in early 2025. The Falls Creek Borough officials have and continue to consult with EPA regarding potential future redevelopment on the site. EPA has developed a Reuse Profile that can help inform potential developers. EPA will continue to support the Borough in reuse planning. 
Top of Page