HENDERSON ROADUPPER MERION TOWNSHIP, PA 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 7-acre Henderson Road Site is located in a commercial area of Upper Merion Township, Pennsylvania. Beginning in 1975, the O’Hara Sanitation Company used the area for waste storage, waste recycling, vehicle maintenance and parking, and office facilities. Operators used a former industrial water supply well to dispose of industrial liquid wastes during the 1970s. Contaminants include volatile organic compounds such as benzene, toluene, perchloroethene, and trichloroethene, and polyaromatic hydrocarbons. Site activities also included disposal of wastes in an on-site landfill and on properties next to the Site. The landfill did not have a permit and contains a mixture of construction demolition debris and other commercial wastes, cinders, a former trenching area, and four underground storage tanks. Liquid waste, sludge, and drums also may have been disposed of at the landfill. These activities contaminated soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. EPA placed the Site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in 1984. Following cleanup, operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Site is being addressed through federal and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. 
February 6, 2023, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Region 3, finalized the ROD Amendment which modifies the Remedial Action selected for the Site by the EPA in the June 30,1988 ROD for Operable Unit 1 (OU1).  The major change in this ROD Amendment replaces the groundwater extraction and treatment system with aerobic and anaerobic in-situ bioremediation.  In addition to the remedial technology change, this ROD Amendment revises and clarifies the OU1 Remedial Action Objectives by clarifying the point of compliance groundwater cleanup to be groundwater restoration. This ROD Amendment additionally modifies the list of contaminants of concern (COCs) and the cleanup levels for certain COCs, establishes performance standards to incorporate a cumulative risk assessment, and clarifies re-evaluation requirements. In addition to the changes noted in the ROD Amendment,  the sub-slab de-pressurization system (SSDS) at the onsite building is still being operated to further mitigate the risk of vapor exposure.  Groundwater monitoring wells are sampled quarterly to measure the concentration of contaminants to ensure the remedial actions at the Site are effective. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
On February 6, 2023, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Region 3, finalized the ROD Amendment (PDF) which modifies the Remedial Action selected for the Site by the EPA in the June 30, 1988 ROD for Operable Unit 1 (OU1).  The major change in this ROD Amendment replaces the groundwater extraction and treatment system with aerobic and anaerobic in-situ bioremediation.  In addition to the remedial technology change, this ROD Amendment revises and clarifies the OU1 Remedial Action Objectives by clarifying the point of compliance groundwater cleanup to be groundwater restoration. This ROD Amendment additionally modifies the list of contaminants of concern (COCs) and the cleanup levels for certain COCs, establishes performance standards to incorporate a cumulative risk assessment, and clarifies re-evaluation requirements Current Site work for the injection well remediation involves: ongoing vapor extraction system operation and maintenance, light non-aqueous phase liquid (LNAPL) removal, vapor intrusion monitoring inside the on-site garage, and quarterly sub-surface water sampling. EPA and the potentially responsible parties are assessing alternative remedies for groundwater treatment. In the event that an alternative remedy is selected for the Site, a decision document prepared by EPA will be required to modify the selected remedy. Pumping the groundwater around the major contamination source, the injection well, creates a cone of depression which draws water from the highly contaminated sub-surface areas. The landfill cap prevents off-site release of contamination due to wind or water erosion, prevents shallow leachate seeps in the adjacent stream, Frog Run, and limits leachate generation contributing to groundwater pollution. Operation and maintenance for the landfill includes vegetation maintenance and erosion repair, leachate monitoring and methane monitoring. While the ultimate cleanup objective for the aquifer restoration has not been met, the remedy remains effective in protecting human health and the environment, by controlling the off-site migration of contaminants. Restoration of the aquifer to meet cleanup goals is ongoing throughout the entire groundwater contaminant plume area.  EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the Site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by Site decision documents. The most recent 2018 Five-Year Review (PDF), concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term, because the groundwater extraction and treatment system required by the Record of Decision is currently shut down while alternative remedial technologies are evaluated for groundwater. While the system is shut down, exposure pathways that could result in unacceptable risks are being controlled and groundwater is being monitored. The next five-year review is scheduled for 2023. Top of Page