BERKS LANDFILLSPRING TOWNSHIP, PA
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Berks Landfill Superfund Site is located in Spring Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania. It is approximately seven miles southwest of the City of Reading. The property historically was used as an iron ore mine. From the 1950s to the 1980s, the Berks Landfill operated as a municipal landfill. In 1975, the landfill was granted a permit by the state to discharge leachate from its collection system into an adjacent stream. Also in 1975, the eastern landfill was granted a solid waste permit to accept municipal refuse and demolition refuse. In 1986, landfill operations ended and the landfills were closed with a soil cap. A fence was erected around the eastern landfill, the existing cap was repaired, and a pumping station was constructed to convey the landfill leachate to the local wastewater treatment plant. The Berks Landfill site was added to the Superfund program's National Priorities List in October 1989 and deleted from the NPL in November 2008. EPA continues regular inspection of the landfills and site property in conjunction with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In July 1997, EPA selected a remedy that included the following:
﻿Repair of the eastern landfill cap;
Repair and continued operation of the existing leachate collection system;
Long-term sampling and monitoring of the sentinel well, several residential wells, the on-site monitoring wells, landfill gas, and the creek; and
Implementation of institutional controls (ICs) to prevent future consumption of on-site groundwater and to restrict development and other activities on-site.
In 1998, EPA issued an Administrative Order to the potentially responsible parties (PRPs) to perform the cleanup work. EPA approved the plans for the remedy and construction in May 2000.  Construction at the site began in June 2000 and was completed in November 2000. EPA provided regular oversight of the work. The following activities were completed:
Eastern landfill was cleared of vegetation then covered by soil and seeded;
﻿Over 7,000 feet of inspection trails were created on the western landfill;
Leachate collection lines and manholes were cleaned, inspected, and repaired;
Three leachate collection ponds were re-shaped and re-lined. The ponds were designed to collect up to 1.5 million gallons of leachate and pump it to the local wastewater treatment plant; and
﻿Monitoring probes and groundwater monitoring wells were installed to monitor landfill gas at the site. 
After conducting a series of inspections, EPA determined the remedy was satisfactorily constructed in December 2000. These findings were documented in a Preliminary Close-Out Report.    In March 2008, EPA prepared a Final Close-Out Report for the Berks Landfill site which documented that the cleanup was fully implemented and the cleanup objectives were met. The site was deleted from the National Priorities List in November 2008.
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA continues to oversee the operation and maintenance at the site in conjunction with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. EPA has conducted multiple five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent, 2020 Five-Year Review (PDF), concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. The next five-year review will be completed in July 2025.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in place to prevent the use of groundwater in the area of contamination. There are also controls to prevent the disturbance of the protective construction that has been put in place on the landfills Additional information about the institutional controls is available in the 2020 Five-Year Review (PDF) (pages 9-10).

Emergency Response and Removal
The cleanup also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. Removal actions in 1996 included the installation of soil caps over landfill areas; a soil liner beneath a portion of the eastern landfill; passive landfill gas vents; surface water management systems; lined leachate collection ponds; a leachate collection and management system; and security fencing.
