Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 9-acre Hellertown Manufacturing Co. site is located in Hellertown, Pennsylvania. From 1930 to 1975, the Hellertown Manufacturing Company manufactured spark plugs at the site. Site operators disposed of manufacturing wastes, including trichloroethylene (TCE), zinc plating waste, chrome dip waste, cleaners and cutting oils, in unlined lagoons. These activities contaminated soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. The Site was added to the National Priorities List (NPL) on March 31, 1989. Following cleanup, operation and maintenance activities are ongoing.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 1991, the EPA selected a cleanup remedy for the site. The remedy called for construction of an impermeable cover over the former lagoon area and installation of a groundwater extraction and treatment system. The EPA began designing the remedy in early 1992. Design of the impermeable cover was completed in April 1993 and construction of the cover was completed in July 1994. The design of the groundwater pump and treatment system was completed in December 1994. Construction of the pump and treatment system was completed in March 1996. The treatment system operated until August 1997 when the lone extraction well failed, resulting in sand and grit being pumped into the plant. Replacement of that extraction well and repairs to the plant were completed in July 1999. The operation of the pump and the treat system was halted in 2012 to evaluate contaminant levels under static groundwater conditions. A soil/gas survey was completed in December 2002, followed by soil sampling of a potential trichloroethylene (﻿TCE) contamination source, in addition to a spring/seep study that was completed in April 2004. The soil sampling showed elevated levels of TCE near well CSP-7, located adjacent to the treatment building. These elevated levels were not high enough to warrant removal action. In 2014, a follow-up sampling effort was conducted in this area. Based on the soil sample results, it was decided that no further action was necessary in this area. From 2008 to 2010, a vapor intrusion study was conducted on several properties within the immediate vicinity of well CSP-7. The results of the study indicate that there is no current vapor intrusion threat to the off-site properties evaluated, although one of the properties required re-sampling to verify original results. Some confirmatory, follow-up sampling was conducted in 2013. In 2012, an Explanation of Significant Differences was prepared that modified the orginial cleanup plan, changing the groundwater cleanup standard from background to the drinking water Maximum Contaminant Levels.
What Is the Current Site Status?
A pump and treat system that extracts and treats groundwater that is contaminated primarily with trichloroethylene (﻿TCE), a chemical component of solvents, is in place (although it is not operating at this time). When operating, the extraction system pumps and treats groundwater and dischages it to the Saucon Creek under a state permit. Groundwater is currently sampled on a semi-annual basis. Consent Decree negotiations between EPA and the potentially responsible parties, Federal-Mogul Corporation and Paikes Enterprises, Inc., for reimbursement of past cleanup costs and the takeover of the remediation work ended when Federal-Mogul declared bankruptcy on October 1, 2001. On-site activities that are currently underway include monitoring of groundwater to assess the contaminant levels. A new monitoring well was installed in November 2005 between the Site and the nearby Saucon Creek to assist in refining the delineation of the contamination plume. The state assumed all operation and maintenance responsibility for the site in September 2007. The EPA has investigated several properties for potential vapor intrusion issues related to the TCE contamination in groundwater. The initial investigation was finalized in May 2009 with some follow-up sampling that was performed in 2013. In 2012, an Explanation of Significant Differences was prepared which modified the original cleanup plan, changing the groundwater cleanup standard from background to the drinking water Maximum Contaminant Levels identified in the Safe Drinking Water Act. The site’s long-term remedy included capping the former lagoon area; surface water runoff controls; groundwater extraction and treatment; long-term groundwater monitoring; and deed restrictions. Construction of the remedy took place between 1993 and 1996. EPA halted operation of the groundwater treatment system in 2012 to evaluate contaminant levels under static groundwater conditions. Groundwater monitoring is ongoing. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the Site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by Site decision documents. The most recent, 2020 Five-Year Review (PDF), concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short-term. The next five-year review is scheduled for 2025.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in placed to restrict the use of groundwater for domestic use and prohibit the excavation of contaminated soils. Additional information about the institutional controls are available in the 2020 Five-Year Review (page 7).
