RIVER ROAD LANDFILL (WASTE MANAGEMENT, INC.)HERMITAGE, PA 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The River Road Landfill site, located in Mercer County, Pennsylvania, is a 102-acre inactive landfill that operated from 1962 until 1986. The landfill accepted municipal and industrial wastes, including foundry and metal processing waste, polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) wastes, asbestos, and residues from tank car cleaning. Ownership of the landfill was transferred several times over the years. The current owner, Waste Management of Pennsylvania, Inc. purchased the landfill in 1980, using it only for the disposal of non-hazardous industrial wastes. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) fined the company for several waste disposal violations, including discharging leachate into surface waters and operating a solid waste disposal area without a permit. The facility received a permit in 1984 for solid waste disposal but stopped receiving waste in May 1986. In 1987, Waste Management of Pennsylvania carried out a PADEP approved landfill closure.  Approximately 4,500 people live within a mile of the site, and 9,000 people live within three miles. Two sedimentation ponds catch runoff from the site and also control spillways draining into the Shenango River, which is located next to the landfill's southern border. This site was proposed to the National Priority List (NPL) on January 22, 1987 and formally added to the list October 4, 1989.
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 1987, Waste Management of Pennsylvania carried out a Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) approved landfill closure program that entailed: 
placing a cap over the landfill to keep rainwater and runoff from spreading contaminants,
installing a leachate collection system and a ground water dam,
controlling erosion and sedimentation,
revegetating the site, and
fencing the area to restrict access. 
EPA and Waste Management signed a consent order in 1990, in which the company agreed to conduct an intensive study of problems at the site. The investigation explored the nature and extent of contamination and recommended the best approaches for final cleanup. The EPA Record of Decision (ROD), completed in 1995, specifies continued operation and maintenance of the remedial activities completed under the PADEP closure plan and implementation of deed restrictions for the site as the selected remedy for final site cleanup. In 1999, an Explanation of Significant Difference modified the ROD to update the cost of the selected remedy by adding the costs of operation and maintenance of the long-term remedial activities. A February 2000 Consent Decree required the Potentially Responsible Parties (PRPs) to implement deed restrictions to prohibit installing groundwater wells and excavating soil﻿. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The River Road Landfill site was deleted from the National Priorities List of most hazardous waste sites, in January 2004. Although the site was removed from the list, the remedial actions completed under the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) landfill closure plan will continue to be maintained. In coordination with the PADEP, EPA continues to review the Site's groundwater monitoring data on a quarterly basis. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the Site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by Site decision documents. The most recent, 2019 Five-Year Review (PDF), concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term because the landfill is capped, contaminated groundwater is contained, the Site is fenced, and institutional controls prevent the use of contaminated groundwater and residential construction on the Site. However, in order for the remedy to be protective in the long term, the surface water and sediment samples from the sedimentation basins and the river need to be collected and analyzed as required by the Record of Decision. The next five-year review is scheduled for 2024.  Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in placed to restrict groundwater use, protect the cap and prohibit residental construction. Additional information about the institutional controls are available in the 2019 Five-Year Review (PDF) (pages 9-10).
Top of Page