BELL LANDFILLTERRY TOWNSHIP, PA 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 33-acre Bell Landfill Superfund Site is located in the town of Towanda in Terry Township, Bradford County, Pennsylvania. From 1970 until 1981, the site accepted municipal and hazardous wastes to both permitted and unpermitted landfill locations. In 1979, nearby residents began reporting that odors and leachate were coming from the site. Between 1980 and 1988, EPA and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection completed a preliminary assessment and site investigation, which confirmed that past disposal practices contaminated groundwater, surface soil, and sediment at the site with volatile organic compounds, semi-volatile organic compounds, and metals. In 1989, EPA added the site on the National Priorities List, making it eligible for cleanup under the federal Superfund program. Following cleanup, operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
In 1991, the potentially responsible parties for the contamination at the site entered into an Administrative Order on Consent with EPA to conduct a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study to examine the nature and extent of contamination. The Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study was approved by EPA in 1993. In 1994, EPA issued a Record of Decision that identified the final cleanup remedy selected for the site. The final remedy included capping the two on-site landfills to prevent direct contact with site-related contaminants, constructing a new system for collection and off-site disposal of leachate, installing a gas venting system, and instituting deed restrictions to prevent future on-site groundwater and residential use of the site. These restrictions, referred to as institutional controls, are registered with the Bradford County Recorder of Deeds. The remedy for groundwater included the reduction of contaminants through natural processes and monitoring, and regular sampling of local drinking water wells. In 1997, EPA and the potentially responsible parties entered a Remedial Design/Remedial Action Consent Decree to implement the remedy. The remedy was completed in 2000. Operation and maintenance activities, including monthly site inspections, fence maintenance, and groundwater monitoring, began once the construction of the remedy was completed. In 2008, it was determined that additional storage capacity was required to manage an increased volume of leachate. EPA issued an Explanation of Significant Differences, which modified the leachate management system to include a lined impoundment and spray irrigation system to handle the increased volume of leachate. A new monitoring program was approved by EPA and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection in July 2009. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The long-term remedy at the site includes a cap on two of the landfills to prevent anyone from coming into direct contact with wastes, and system to collect and manage the leachate and stormwater. An operation and maintenance program has been in place at the site since the completion of the remedy in 2000. This program includes monthly inspections and ensures that remedy remains protective. Routine groundwater monitoring indicates that concentrations of volatile organic compounds and semi-volatile organic compounds have decreased to acceptable cleanup levels. Site controls include maintaining fencing to restrict access and deed restrictions to prohibit land and groundwater uses that are not compatible with the remedy. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent, 2023 Five-Year Review (PDF), concluded that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. In summary, the landfill caps prevent direct contact with wastes, leachate is being collected, volatile organic compounds in the groundwater have naturally decreased in concentration, nearby residential wells are being protected, long-term monitoring for metals of concern in affected media is ongoing, and institutional controls are in place. The next five-year review is scheduled for 2028.  Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are in place to restrict the use of on-site groundwater, avoid any touching or handling of the leachate and contaminated soils, and prevent the site from being used in any form of residential use. Additional information about the institutional controls are available in the 2023 Five-Year Review (PDF) (page 10). Top of Page