VEGA BAJA SOLID WASTE DISPOSALRIO ABAJO WARD, PR
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Vega Baja Solid Waste Disposal site is located in the Rio Abajo Ward of Vega Baja, Puerto Rico. The 72-acre area includes an unlined and uncapped solid waste disposal and open burning area. From about 1948 to 1979, the municipality of Vega Baja used the site as an unlined solid waste disposal and open burning facility that received commercial, industrial and domestic waste. More than 1.1 million cubic yards of waste were disposed of or burned at the facility. In the late 1970s, local residents began building homes on portions of the uncapped waste disposal area. EPA conducted extensive sampling at the site and found lead, arsenic and pesticides in the soil and groundwater. After immediate actions to protect human health and the environment, the site’s long-term cleanup is ongoing. Between 1948 and 1979, the municipality of Vega Baja used the site as an unlined solid waste disposal and open burning facility that received commercial, industrial and domestic waste. More than 1.1 million cubic yards of waste were disposed of or burned at the facility. Based on historical aerial photographs, disposal activities were largely concentrated in the southwestern portion of the now developed area, and in the northern portion of the undeveloped area of the site. At the time of disposal and burning activities, the Puerto Rico Land Authority owned the site property. Local residents began building homes on portions of the uncapped waste disposal area beginning in the late 1970s. Many houses at the site are built on and around the landfill trash, with some piles (mounds) having elevations of over eight feet. Various environmental investigations have been conducted at the site since 1994. These investigations identified mostly metal concentrations in site soils above screening criteria. After immediate actions to protect human health and the environment, EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in July 1999.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Immediate Actions: In 2001, following a removal assessment, EPA cleaned up three residential lots with high levels of lead in their soil. In 2004, EPA removed unstable material from a trash mound and consolidated the material in an undeveloped area. The consolidated material was covered with a geotextile barrier and about 2 feet of clean soil. Long-term Cleanup: EPA conducted a study to define the nature and extent of the site-related groundwater contamination. Sampling found that groundwater beneath the site is essentially free of site-related contaminations and surface water is unaffected by the site. EPA concluded that there was no threat posed to human health or the environment and no need for further actions related to groundwater.
.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site is being addressed in two stages: immediate actions and a long-term remedial phase focused on cleanup of the entire site. Cleanup activities at the site have included short term actions to clean up residential soils, a site investigation of potential groundwater contamination at the site and investigation of contaminated site soils. EPA selected a remedy to address soil contamination in the site’s September 2010 Record of Decision, or ROD. It includes the removal, on-site consolidation and covering of lead-contaminated soil in the non-residential area. Excavation areas include 16 residential yards, a drainage ditch and three trash mounds. All residential yards will be backfilled and revegetated to restore pre-excavation conditions. The remedy also includes institutional controls such as deed and land use restrictions to minimize the public's potential exposure to contaminated soils. Design of the remedy is underway. On September 17, 2015, Notice of Remedial Action Construction Completion for OU2 was issued.  Public PRPs will continue with the O&M activities at the site.    On January 17, 2024, the EPA issued the Updated Soil Lead Guidance for CERCLA Sites and RCRA Corrective Action Facilities that lowered the recommended screening levels for lead-contaminated residential soils. As such, EPA will be conducting further site assessment activities including, but not limited to, the following tasks: property reconnaissance, property inspection, and soil sampling activities to determine the current condition of the Site. These site assessment activities will be performed at some of the properties located within the residential area of the Site, in the Brisas del Rosario community, and at properties located east and southeast of the Site, adjacent to previously assessed properties.  Based on this assessment EPA will determine if additional investigations and/or cleanup is needed. EPA will share information on planned activities as results become available. Community involment and inspection activities are expected to begin in October 2024 and the soil sampling activities are expected to begin during the first months of 2025.
