PESTICIDE WAREHOUSE IARECIBO, PR
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Pesticide Warehouse I (PWI) site is located in Arecibo, Puerto Rico. The 1-acre area is an active pesticide storage warehouse. It consists of a main warehouse, a smaller secondary warehouse in the rear of the property and a small storage shed. Facility operations contaminated soils and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. Field work is ongoing to determine if a remedy is needed to eliminate, reduce or control risks to human health and the environment.
Historically, the Puerto Rico Land Authority (PRLA) owned the site property. PWI has been operating at this location since 1953 and supplies pesticides for pineapple crops in the surrounding area. The site is used for the storage and preparation of insecticides, herbicides and fertilizers (hereafter collectively referred to as pesticides). PRLA stored and diluted pesticides and fertilizers on site for agricultural application in pineapple farming. Pesticides were diluted in the pineapple field prior to their application. Operations include mixing pesticides with water in tanker trucks. Leftover and excess pesticides have been disposed of on the ground next to the main warehouse. Beginning in October 1999, Agrocampos, Inc. leased the site property. The company also used the site to store and dilute pesticides and fertilizers for agricultural application in pineapple farming.  After additional investigations, EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in September 2006
 .

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
 In a March 1996 investigation, EPA observed poor housekeeping practices at the site, including broken bags of pesticides and 25 drums in the main warehouse without secondary containment measures; pesticide bottles scattered throughout the property; a 20-foot-by-20-foot excavation in the northwest corner of the property that contained empty pesticide bottles, Malathion labels, and bags of Vydate, Gramoxone and magnesium sulfate; visible pesticide residue at several locations; and a white residue along what appeared to be the surface runoff pathway that began at the mixing platform in front of the main warehouse. In May 1996, EPA conducted a site inspection, collecting 15 surface soil samples from across the property and two groundwater samples from the property well. Analytical results of surface soil samples indicated the presence of several pesticides, including aldrin, endrin, endrin aldehyde, gamma-chlordane, toxaphene, diazinon and diuron. Analyses of the groundwater samples indicated the presence of heptachlor epoxide, dieldrin, 4,4'-DDE and endrin. In December 2001, EPA did a follow-up investigation. Agency staff observed the mixing of pesticides with water in tanker trucks, an absence of vegetation at the site, and the presence of stressed and blackened vegetation along the surface runoff pathway adjacent to the Property access road. Poor housekeeping was once again observed, including the scattering of empty pesticide bottles across the property.
  After additional investigations, EPA placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List in September 2006 On August 18, 2006, EPA issued a notice letter to PRLA and Agrocampos notifying them that, based on information collected by EPA, EPA had reason to believe that the PRLA, as the current owner of the Site, and Agrocampos, as a former operator at the Site, were owners and operators of the Site, respectively, during the time of disposal of hazardous substances. Accordingly, both PRLA and Agrocampos, Inc. could be liable with respect to the Site under Section 107(a) of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. Section 9607(a). EPA and Respondents (Puerto Rico Land Authority and Agro Campo, Inc) have negotiated in good faith over the terms of two Administrative Agreement Orders on Consent (OU1 and OU2 Orders). The Orders are issued pursuant to Sections 104, 107 and 122 of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9604, 9607 and 9622. Under the OU1 Order, Respondents will perform the Remedial Investigation / Feasibility Study (RI/FS) for OU1 to determine the extent of soil contamination at the Site. Under the OU2 Order, Respondents will perform the RI/FS for OU2 to determine the extent of groundwater contamination at the Site. EPA decided to take over the Remedial Investigation/ Feasibility Study Project.    EPA and the PRPs expecting to begin the field work at this site during Four Quarter 2016.

What Is the Current Site Status?
Due to the complexity of the karst terrain hydrogeology at the site, EPA has determined that site investigations and remediation should be addressed in two operable units. The first operable unit (OU-1) will evaluate soil contamination. The second operable unit (OU-2) will determine the nature and extent of groundwater contamination.
