DORADO GROUND WATER CONTAMINATIONDORADO, PR
  Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Dorado Ground Water Contamination (DGWC) site includes a groundwater plume, which is an area where contaminants disperse in the water table underground. It is located in the municipality of Dorado, north-central Puerto Rico. The source of the contamination is unclear. There are two active water supply systems in Dorado, Maguayo and Dorado Urbano. These systems are not drawing water from the contaminated plume, and they are tested regularly to ensure they meet drinking water standards. Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA) operated the contaminated wells, but they were taken out of service/are used only for blending/something that says people are not drinking the contaminated water. The US Geological Survey detected volatile organic compounds (VOCs), primarily tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and trichloroethylene (TCE) in the Maguayo and Dorado Urbano wells in the 1980s and the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA) and Puerto Rico Department of Health (PRDOH) detected the contaminants in the wells between 1996 to 2000.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The Super Aqueduct is being used to supplement the water supply. PRASA has shut down all wells with contamination above drinking water standards for volatile organic compounds (VOCs).
What Is the Current Site Status?
EPA will clean up the groundwater contaminated with volatile organic compounds, specifically trichloroethylene (TCE) and tetrachloroethene (PCE), by allowing the contaminants to continue to break down naturally and with careful monitoring, a process called monitored natural attenuation (MNA). EPA will use the BIL funds to install more monitoring wells. There are also restrictions placed on the use of the groundwater.  EPA documented a final cleanup plan for the site’s contaminated groundwater in the September 2021 Record of Decision (ROD). The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) prepared the design for the new monitoring wells, called the remedial design, in August 2022. EPA is currently working on a remedial action task order that would allow for the new monitoring wells to be installed in summer 2023. Once the work begins, the wells will be monitored semi-annually for the first two years, and annually thereafter. Monitored natural attenuation is expected to last up to 18 years. The total cleanup is estimated to cost $830,000.00.
