COROZAL WELLCOROZAL, PR 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Corozal Well site consists of a ground water plume with no identified source(s) of contamination, located in Barrio Palos Blancos, Corozal, a rural residential community in interior north-central Puerto Rico. The site straddles the border between the municipalities of Corozal and Naranjito. The groundwater plume currently affects the Comunidad Santana well, which is the sole source of drinking water for a rural community of more than 200 people. Other community supply wells are located within approximately one mile of the plume. The Corozal Well site is located in Barrio Palos Blancos, Corozal, Puerto Rico. It consists of a groundwater plume with no identified source(s) of contamination. Sampling at the site, which is in a rural area near the municipalities of Corozal and Naranjito, found that the chemical tetrachloroethylene (PCE) is contaminating a well that supplies supply drinking water to local residents. Exposure to PCE, a solvent commonly used in industrial processes, can have serious effects on people’s health, including liver damage and an increased risk of cancer. After discovering the contamination in 2010, the Puerto Rico Department of Health ordered the well closed. In March 2011, EPA reconfigured the Santana Well and the shallow bedrock zone was sealed with grout.  Also installed a granular activated carbon (GAC) treatment system on the well to remove contaminants and provide the community with water that is safe to drink.   Since 2011 PCE concentration in the raw water extracted fromthe Santana well have decreased and is currently below MCL. In 2015, EPA completed the remedial Investigation. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
After discovering the contamination in 2010, the Puerto Rico Department of Health ordered the well closed. In March 2011, EPA installed a treatment system on the well to remove the contaminants and provide the community with water that is safe to drink. 
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
In February-March 2011, EPA installed a granular-activated-carbon (GAC) treatment system at the site, reinstalled the well pump, and began to pump treated well water into the community water supply for distribution. The site was added to the NPL in 2011. Top of Page