Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Sampling and Monitoring
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 25-acre Western Sand & Gravel site is located in a rural area on the boundary of Burrillville and North Smithfield in Rhode Island. The area was the location of a sand and gravel quarry operation from 1953 until 1975. From 1975 to 1979, about 12 acres were used for the disposal of liquid wastes, including chemicals and septic waste. Over time, the wastes penetrated into the permeable soil and contaminated the groundwater. Contents of tank trucks were also emptied directly into 12 open, unlined lagoons and pits. The pits were concentrated on a hill that slopes towards Tarkiln Brook, which drains into the Slaterville Reservoir. The state closed the disposal operation after nearby residents complained of odors. The site was placed on the National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1983. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state, and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. In early 1980, the state began to pump a lagoon dry to halt leachate movement. Some 60,000 gallons of liquid chemical and septic waste were taken off site for disposal. A groundwater recirculation system was installed, and a permanent alternate water supply was set up to serve 56 parcels. In 1988, a 2-acre cap was installed over the areas of contaminated soil and sludge, and the site was graded to promote runoff and drainage. The capped area was fenced, and the site’s PRPs agreed to maintain the fence, cap, and site. EPA considered construction of cleanup activities complete at that time. Site PRPs investigated the extent of contamination to evaluate alternatives for cleanup of off-site groundwater. Based on this investigation, EPA selected a plan for cleaning groundwater through natural attenuation. EPA regularly evaluates the progress of natural attenuation. If natural attenuation is not progressing at the expected rate, EPA may require more active remediation. Cleanup Progress. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Contaminated areas have been fenced, capped and graded. The landfill is routinely inspected to ensure it is performing as designed. The site has been stabilized, and an alternative water supply has been made available while natural attenuation processes clean contaminated groundwater. Institutional controls prohibit the use of the groundwater in the meantime. The alternative water supply system was installed along with a groundwater monitoring network. The alternative water supply continues to supply affected residences downgradient of the Site. The public water supply continues to operate as designed and meets Rhode Island Department of Health requirements for a public water supply. Monitoring wells on-site are routinely tested for the presence of site contaminants using U.S.EPA approved methods to ensure the remedy is performing as designed. 
In 2001, Supreme Mid-Atlantic, Inc. bought the site property and built a truck body assembly plant on the up-gradient part of the site in 2003-2004. The development consists primarily of a 20,000-square-foot assembly building and open space for truck parking. The plant employs about 30 people. Emerging contaminants 1,4 Dioxane and PFAS were first detected in groundwater in 2018, and subsequent sampling has shown low concentrations of PFAS compounds in groundwater monitoring wells on and off-site. While samples indicated concentrations in some wells downgradient of the site exceed the current EPA maximum contaminant limit (MCL) for PFOA, this does not pose a health risk because all residents downgradient of the site are on a public water supply and several institutional controls are in place which prohibit the installation or use of groundwater wells in the impacted area, thereby preventing exposure to impacted groundwater. As outlined in the 2023 Five-year review, the long-term monitoring plan is being modified to conduct additional sampling for PFAS and is expected to begin in 2025.     Remediation of groundwater for site contaminants via monitored natural attenuation (MNA) continues to be effective and is expected to reach target cleanup levels by 2028. Because waste remains in place within the on-site landfill, groundwater monitoring will continue even after targets have been reached to ensure the remedy continues to be protective. Cleanup Progress. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site. This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above. Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of document, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted.  Top of Page
Sampling and Monitoring
A Five-year review of the remedy was performed in 2023 and found that the remedy remains protective of human health and the environment. In addition, restoration of groundwater remains on target and is expected to meet established site-specific targets within the next five years.  The five-year review recommends continued monitoring of existing groundwater wells, groundwater elevation, and flow direction, as well as more frequent sampling and analysis of 1,4 Dioxane and PFAS on-site to better understand potential impacts. To access all Five Year Reviews, please see WS&G's FYR reports. In February 2024, devices which continuously measure and record groundwater elevation were added to select on-site monitoring wells in order to measure groundwater elevation and flow direction as reccomended in the 2023 Five-year review. These devices will collect data for one year to account for seasonality, and in Spring 2025 will be removed and the data analyzed to determine if there has been any changes to groundwater elevation or flow direction. Further, an amended long-term monitoring plan which includes additional sampling for 1,4-Dioxane and PFAS is in development and expected to be implemented in Spring 2025. Top of Page