CENTRAL LANDFILLJOHNSTON, RI 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Central Landfill site is a 154-acre active waste disposal facility in Johnston, Rhode Island. The site consists of two operable units (OUs). OU-1 consists of the entire site – the 121-acre Phase I Landfill area (Phase I) and the 33-acre Phase II and III landfill areas. The OU-2 study area included about 1,333 acres surrounding the 154-acre OU-1 site. During the mid to late 1970s, a half-acre area (referred to as the “hot spot”) within the unlined Phase I landfill was used for disposal of large volumes of liquid industrial waste, resulting in soil and groundwater contamination. Following construction of the site’s remedy, groundwater treatment and operation and maintenance activities are ongoing. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions.The source control remedy selected for OU-1 in the site’s 1994 Record of Decision includes, among other things, capping the site and hydraulic containment and treatment of the groundwater in the hot spot area of the landfill. The hydraulic containment and groundwater treatment system began operating in 2006. In 2013, EPA documented its decision to relocate the hydraulic containment system downgradient of its current location to where the edge of the waste management area will be after a new phase (Phase VI) of the landfill is completed. EPA continues to monitor site conditions.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy includes hydraulic containment and treatment of groundwater in the hot spot area of the landfill. The hydraulic containment and groundwater treatment system began operating in 2006. In 2013, EPA documented its decision to relocate the hydraulic containment system downgradient of its current location to where the edge of the waste management area will be after a new phase (Phase VI) of the landfill is completed. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment in the short term. Long-term protectiveness requires the following actions: design and installation of the relocated hydraulic containment system to adequately capture the OU-1 plume; determination of treatment requirements for water from the new extraction well(s) and the relocation or replacement of the existing groundwater treatment system, as necessary; location and installation of additional monitoring wells to assess the extraction network, containment, compliance with groundwater performance standards, and treatment effectiveness; assessment of the Phase V under drain treatment system; and completion of the study to determine the extent of OU-1 contribution to metals in sediment. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.  This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The matrix below is a general summary of the restrictions at this site at the date of this report. The information in this matrix is a general description of the restrictions at the site only. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site. The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above. Note that where multiple entries occur, it will impact more than one pathway. Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. https://semspub.epa.gov/src/collection/01/SC31710 ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remain onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use. Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found on the site profile page, in the Institutional Control instruments collection of documents, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted. Top of Page