WEST KINGSTON TOWN DUMP/URI DISPOSAL AREASOUTH KINGSTOWN, RI
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 18-acre West Kingston Town Dump/University of Rhode Island (URI) Disposal Area site is located in South Kingston, Rhode Island. The site consists of two adjacent properties, the West Kingston Town Dump and the URI Disposal Area. The 6-acre West Kingston Town Dump received unregulated solid wastes from the 1930s until 1967 when the Rhode Island Department of Health (DOH) noted during a site inspection that wastes disposed of at the site were from industrial, residential, commercial, and institutional sources. The DOH found numerous violations during the inspection. A 1975 study by the URI Department of Civil Engineering and the State Water Resources Board resulted in the discovery of a leachate plume beneath the landfill that was contaminating groundwater as far as 1,200 feet west of the dump. From 1945 to 1987, solid waste was also accepted at the 12-acre URI Disposal Area, referred to in the past as the "URI Gravel Bank" or the "Sherman Farm". Facility operations contaminated soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. After the town dump closed in 1978, the URI Disposal Area began accepting most of URI's waste, including small quantities of empty paint cans, oil containers and pesticide containers. Lab equipment, machinery, closed drums, and old tanks buried on site were discovered by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management during a 1987 inspection. The site was placed on the National Priorities List (NPL) in October 1992.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. In 1987, URI removed 159 tons of materials and transported them to waste disposal facilities. Additional investigations of the site in 1992 and 1993 indicated that the Site did not pose an immediate threat to human health or the environment. Three private wells near the Site were closed in 1988 due to contamination and were connected to the URI water supply. An investigation to determine the nature and extent of contamination at the entire site began in 2002. The first phases of soil, groundwater and surface water testing and preliminary design for the closure of the landfill took place in the spring and summer of 2003. Additional groundwater testing took place in 2004 and 2005. Construction of the landfill caps finished in the spring of 2006. EPA issues a Record of Decision in September 2006 that included in-place oxidation of soil and groundwater followed by monitored natural attenuation of the groundwater, deed restrictions, and long-term environmental monitoring. The in-place oxidation of groundwater was achieved by injecting an oxidant solution into the subsurface area until about 90 percent of the VOC mass in the groundwater was eliminated. Cleanup Progress.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The Site’s long-term remedy included landfill capping, soil cleanup and groundwater treatment. Construction of the landfill caps finished in the spring of 2006. Soils treatment using oxidant injection finished in June 2009. Active groundwater cleanup finished in September 2009. Operation and maintenance activities and monitoring of groundwater natural attenuation are ongoing. EPA, the State and the site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) have established land and groundwater use restrictions at the site. The area is and will continue to be a capped landfill. Cleanup Progress.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site. This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
Disclaimer: This information is being provided by EPA as an informational tool to further assist the public in determining the types of restrictions that may be in place at National Priorities List sites being addressed by EPA under the Superfund program. In addition to the areas addressed by the institutional controls identified on this web site there may be other areas on the property that require restrictions on use of the property that are not captured in this EPA database. States and other entities may have implemented laws or restrictions applicable to this site. The information provided herein does not replace a title search or meet "All Appropriate Inquiry" requirements. U.S. EPA encourages users to review the Site files to obtain information regarding remedy components, containment systems and the land use for which cleanup standards were selected for these sites. More information and links can be found in the Institutional Control instrument collection of documents, above, and the EPA regional offices may also be contacted.
Emergency Response and Removal
Site cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In 1987, URI removed 159 tons of materials and transported them to waste disposal facilities.
