Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Davis Liquid Waste Superfund Site lies between Tarkiln and Log Roads in the northwest section of Smithfield, Rhode Island and consists of a 7-acre source area bounded to the east and west by forested wetlands and the north and south by wetlands.  Surface water drains into Latham Brook and eventually enters Stillwater Reservoir, a tributary to the Woonasquatucket River.   Throughout the 1970s, the owner disposed of a variety of liquid and solid wastes containing hazardous substances.  Tank trucks directly discharged liquid wastes into unlined lagoons and seepage pits. Drums containing chemicals and laboratory containers were buried on site or crushed.  Wastes and contaminated soil were excavated from the lagoons and pits and were dumped at several on-site locations and covered with available soil.  The Site accepted liquid and chemical wastes such as paint and metal sludge, oily wastes, solvents, acids, caustics, pesticides, phenols, halogens, metals, fly ash, and laboratory pharmaceuticals.  The disposal of these wastes contaminated groundwater at and surrounding the Site.  Nearby private wells were found to be contaminated by wastes emanating from the Site in bedrock groundwater. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
From 1985 to 1986, EPA sampled, packed, and shipped about 600 intact and crushed drums to an approved disposal facility. At the same time, the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM) supplied bottled water for drinking and cooking to residences with contaminated wells.  This temporary action provided a safe water supply while a permanent remedy was evaluated. The construction of a new water distribution system serving 127 lots along Forge Road, Log Road, Burlingame Road, and Bayberry Road was also completed by EPA and RIDEM in December 1997.  The new system included the construction of a 300,000-gallon water storage tank, a water main, pumping stations, and connections to existing residences. For several undeveloped lots, EPA also brought service to the property line. EPA completed a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study for the Site in 1987 selecting a remedy to protect the public and environment.  In 1996, EPA signed a Consent Decree with 54 Settling Parties (the “Parties”) that EPA believed were potentially responsible for contamination at the Site.  Those Parties then took over the cleanup under EPA and RIDEM oversight.  In 1998, the Parties removed approximately 5,000 tons of solid waste, soils, and 800 drums and containers from the Site.  Between 1999 and 2001, the Parties removed approximately 20,000 tons of contaminated soil, wastes, and debris for disposal offsite at a licensed facility and excavated and treated 78,000 tons of contaminated soil via low-temperature thermal desorption, backfilling the treated material at the Site.  The disturbed areas were vegetated and over 300 trees were planted to help restore habitat value.  This remedy removed surface hazards from the Site. The remaining threat to human health and the environment is groundwater contamination.  The Parties, under oversight by EPA and RIDEM, investigated the distribution, transport, and fate of groundwater contamination.  The 2010 Record of Decision selected in-situ (in place) chemical treatment and enhanced biodegradation to destroy the remaining volatile organic compound (VOC) contaminants present in the saturated, near-surface soils.  During the investigation, EPA determined that this remedy would be ineffective in protecting human health and the environment, would not comply with Federal and State requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate, would not be cost-effective, and would not provide permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the maximum extent practicable.  During the investigations for this remedy, the data indicated that the bulk of the contamination originates in the deeper bedrock rather than solely residing in the near-surface saturated soils.  Therefore, EPA, RIDEM, and the Parties collected additional data and examined potential means to address this new understanding of contaminant distribution and character. This resulted in a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study issued in 2020 that outlined potential remedies and outcomes. EPA issued a Record of Decision on September 14, 2020, that selected a groundwater cleanup remedy. EPA has negotiated with parties that will perform that remedy. In 2022, several liquid treatment injection options were compared and small scale laboratory studies were performed to determine the most effective treatment for the Davis Liquid Superfund site. In early 2023, the DSG completed installation of several new monitoring and injection wells and began a tracer study to ensure that the injected liquid treatments will reach the contaminated bedrock. The Remedial Design (RD) is in its final stages and is anticipated to be complete by the end of 2023. The Remedial Action (RA) is anticipated to begin in the summer of 2025 upon successful completion of the RD and acceptance by EPA and the State of Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The remaining threat to human health and the environment is groundwater contamination.  The Parties, under oversight by EPA and RIDEM, investigated the distribution, transport, and fate of groundwater contamination.  Based on the investigation EPA developed a Proposed Plan, presented that to the public for comment, and based on those comments issued a decision document. That decision document, an Interim Record of Decision Amendment 2 (2020 ROD), was issued on September 14, 2020. The 2020 ﻿ROD is designated as Amendment 2, amending the 2010 Record of Decision Amendment, because it changes the 2010 remedy from biotreatment of groundwater in the near-surface overburdened groundwater. The findings presented in the 2020 Feasibility Study and subsequent 2020 ROD found that groundwater contamination is most likely originating from liquid-phase pure contaminants trapped in fractures deep in the bedrock, which is slowly dissolving into the surrounding groundwater The 2020 ROD is an Interim ROD because EPA believes that it is necessary to determine the nature of the liquid-phase pure contaminants and if they can be treated successfully. The remedy will consist of treatability studies to determine the methods and materials needed to treat the contaminants in the deep bedrock aquifer. EPA will evaluate those results over a 12-year period to determine if a final remedy can be selected and performed. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Because contamination will remain in groundwater at the Site, restrictions will be placed to prevent contact with groundwater.
Top of Page