PICILLO FARMCOVENTRY, RI
  Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 8-acre Picillo Farm site is located in Coventry, Rhode Island. The sitewas once part of a former pig farm. More than 10,000 drums of hazardous waste and an undetermined bulk volume of liquid chemicals were disposed of into several unlined trenches. The site was discovered in 1977 after an explosion and fire.EPA and the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM) worked together to complete several environmental investigations and removal actions between 1977 and 1982. The site was added to the National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1983. The selected remedies, as outlined in the 1985 Operable Unit 1 Record of Decision (OU1 ROD) and the 1993 Operable Unit 2 Record of Decision (OU2 ROD) have been completed. Long-term operation and maintenance activities, including groundwater extraction and treatment and environmental monitoring, is ongoing.
.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. From 1980 to 1982, EPA and the state removed bulk wastes as well as about 10,000 buried drums from five trenches on site. The site’s long-term remedy included disposal of contaminated soils in an off-site landfill, fencing, surface drainage controls and closure of the site. These actions finished in 1988. Groundwater and surface water cleanup consisted of in-place soil vapor extraction and treatment of VOCs and SVOCs in contaminated soil, off-site disposal of the surface soil contaminated with PCBs, and extraction and treatment of contaminated groundwater. The extraction system and the treatment plant were in place by 2000. Collection and evaluation of monitoring data is ongoing. Cleanup Progress.
What Is the Current Site Status?
Removal of contaminated soil from trenches, removal of buried drums and waste material, and closure of the site have reduced potential exposures and risks. In the fall of 2006, following a system evaluation by EPA and the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM), soil vapor extraction was stopped. Long-term operation and maintenance activities to contain the groundwater plume and maintain the treatment systems as well as required environmental monitoring are ongoing.  In 2016, EPA completed a site optimizations review to look at ways to bring the site to a closure.  Results of that optimization study are currently under review and wll be implemented as needed. Cleanup Progress.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls are required for this site.
This site requires ICs because a decision document, such as a Record of Decision, has documented some level of contamination and/or remedy component at the site that would restrict use of the site. These ICs are required to help ensure the site is used in an appropriate way and that activities at the site do not damage the cleanup components. These ICs will remain in place for as long as the contamination and/or cleanup components stay on site. The site contacts should be consulted if there are questions on the ICs for this site.
The following IC Instruments provide media-specific use restrictions that have been implemented by EPA for protecting human health, the environment and remedial engineering on this site. Instruments are documents used by EPA or other organizations to implement the use restrictions at a site. To know about other media-specific use restrictions that are planned but not implemented at this site, please contact the Regional Office using the Site Contact listed above.
Click here for IC Instruments implemented for this site. To contact EPA regarding Institutional Controls and/or activity and use limitations, please complete this form. ICs are generally defined as administrative and legal tools that do not involve construction or physically changing the site. Common examples of ICs include site use and excavation restrictions put in place through State and local authorities like zoning, permits and easements. ICs are normally used when waste is left onsite and when there is a limit to the activities that can safely take place at the site (i.e., the site cannot support unlimited use and unrestricted exposure) and/or when cleanup components of the remedy remains onsite (e.g., landfill caps, pumping equipment or pipelines). Effective ICs help ensure that these sites can be returned to safe and beneficial use.
