SHURON INC.BARNWELL, SC
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Shuron, Inc. Superfund Site is located near Barnwell in Barnwell County, South Carolina. The site includes the area where Textron, Inc. operated an eyeglass lens manufacturing facility from 1958 to 1992. The EPA placed the Site on the National Priorities List (NPL) in 1996 because of contaminated groundwater, surface water, soil and sediment resulting from facility operations. The EPA, the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC), and Textron, Inc., the Site’s potentially responsible party (PRP), have investigated Site conditions. By cleaning up groundwater, placing institutional controls on the Site property and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, the EPA, SCDHEC and the Site’s PRP continue to protect people and the environment from Site contamination. The PRP has addressed soil contamination at the Site. Groundwater treatment is ongoing.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Textron, Inc., the Site’s PRP, leads Site investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by the EPA and SCDHEC. The Site’s long-term remedy included:
digging up contaminated soils and sediments for on-Site treatment with solidification, stabilization and aeration or disposal at an off-site facility
digging in areas where contamination remains
long-term monitoring.
2001 – 2002
The PRP removed contaminated soil and sediment in 2001 and 2002. 2010
Groundwater cleanup began in 2010 and included:
installing additional injection wells and groundwater monitoring wells
using chemical injections to increase naturally occurring bacteria to break down contamination
placing institutional controls on the Site property to prohibit groundwater use, residential land uses at the Site

What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published in 2021. At this time, the Sitewide Protectiveness Status at the Shuron site protects human health and the environment. The EPA will issue a Preliminary Close-Out Report following the completion of cleanup activities at the Site.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional controls on the site property prohibit groundwater use and residential land uses at the site
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA negotiated legal agreements with the Site’s PRP to investigate and clean up the Site. The PRP continues to fund site cleanup, monitoring and oversight activities.
