PALMETTO WOOD PRESERVINGDIXIANA, SC 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 5-acre Palmetto Wood Preserving Superfund site is located on Dixiana Road in the rural community of Dixiana in northeastern South Carolina, approximately one-and-a-half miles southeast of West Columbia, four miles south of Cayce and six miles southwest of Columbia. The site includes the former wood preserving facility and two adjacent areas, which are 3.6 acres and 1.3 acres in size. Undeveloped land borders the site to the north, south and west. Residences border the site to the northeast and east. Site surroundings include single-family homes, which include low-income residents, and light industrial businesses. The site includes the area where the Palmetto Wood Preserving Company operated a wood-preserving facility from 1963 to 1985. During this time, wood-treating solution chemicals spilled, leading to soil and groundwater contamination. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1984 because of contaminated groundwater and soil resulting from facility operations. EPA and the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC) have investigated site. By monitoring groundwater and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, EPA and SCDHEC continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. A water line connects residences and businesses to the public water supply. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA leads site investigation and cleanup activities in cooperation with SCDHEC. 1985
EPA provided a temporary alternative drinking water supply to a residence until a permanent water supply could be provided. EPA also removed all equipment and structures from the site. 1987
EPA issued a cleanup plan (a Record of Decision, or ROD) for the site and in. The plan included 
using a pump-and-treat system to address groundwater contamination
discharging treated groundwater to the City of Cayce's wastewater treatment plant
digging up and flushing contaminated soil with an acidic water solution
placing treated soil back in dug-up areas and solidifying the soil. 
1988 – 1989
EPA dug up, treated, solidified/stabilized, placed on site and covered about 12,700 cubic yards of contaminated soil. EPA formed and placed about 20 concrete structures made of the solidified/stabilized material on the two on-site areas next to the former wood-preserving facility. 1993
EPA issued an Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD). 1997
EPA completed construction of the groundwater pump-and-treat system. The system operated until 2004, when it shut down for EPA to complete a long-term monitoring study of the aquifer system. 2008 - 2009
EPA issued a ROD Amendment to change the groundwater cleanup plan from a pump-and-treat system to a system involving the injection of nutrients into groundwater to enhance the natural breakdown of remaining contaminants. EPA decommissioned the system in October 2009, after groundwater met cleanup standards. 2010
SCDHEC began annual monitoring of site wells in 2010. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published by EPA HQs in 2022. The remedy Sitewide currently protects human health and the environment because contaminated soils have been excavated, treated, and solidified in 16 monoliths buried in the original excavations. Annual monitoring of site wells is ongoing. EPA plans to place institutional controls on the site property. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
EPA plans to place institutional controls on the site property. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The PRP has not been involved in site cleanup activities. The EPA and SCDHEC are using federal and state funds for site cleanup activities.
Top of Page