INDEPENDENT NAIL CO.BEAUFORT, SC 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Independent Nail Co. Superfund Site is located in Beaufort, South Carolina. It includes the area where the Blake and Johnson Company operated a screw and fastener manufacturing facility from 1969 to 1980. The Independent Nail Company has operated a paneling nail coating process facility on-site since 1980. The EPA placed the site on the National Priorities List (NPL) in 1984 because of contaminated groundwater, sediment, soil and surface water resulting from waste handling practices. The EPA and the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC) have investigated site conditions and taken steps to clean up the site in order to protect people and the environment from contamination. The EPA took the site off the NPL in 1995. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The EPA led Site investigations and cleanup activities in cooperation with SCDHEC. For cleanup, the EPA divided the site into two areas, referred to as operable units, or OUs. OU-1 addressed the contaminant source. OU-2 addressed contaminated groundwater. 
When﻿
What﻿
﻿1987
The EPA issued the cleanup plan for OU-1. It included: 
digging up, solidifying and stabilizing contaminated soil and sediment
backfilling solidified and stabilized material into the dug-up areas
placing a soil cover over the backfilled area
reseeding the backfilled area to establish a vegetative cover
sampling soil to determine the extent of soil contamination
﻿1988 -- 1989
Following the completion of cleanup activities in 1988, the EPA signed a State Superfund Contract with SCDHEC on September 19, 1989 in which the State of South Carolina provided assurances for State operations and maintenance (O&M) responsibilities. The EPA conducted cleanup activities, digging up 5,500 cubic yards of contaminated soil. The EPA solidified and stabilized the contaminated soil and placed it back into the lagoon area. The EPA completed a Five-Year Review for the site in 1998. It found that the cleanup remains protective of human health and the environment. The EPA issued the cleanup plan for OU-2. It stated that no cleanup activities were needed to address groundwater contamination.
﻿1990 - 2003
SCDHEC conducted groundwater monitoring from 1990 until 2003.
1995
The EPA took the site off the NPL in 1995.
2016
On September 14, 2016 an Explanation of Significant Difference was signed to document a final decision to implement institutional controls in the form of a Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions as part of the OU1 remedy for the site. On September 28, 2016, the restrictive covenants for the Independent Nail property were filed with the Beaufort County Register of Deeds. The restrictive covenants specifically limits groundwater use and future land use and prohibits disturbance of the protective cover over the waste monolith.
2021
The EPA published the third Five Year Review in 2021.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The EPA published the third Five Year Review in 2021. The next Five-Year Review will be in 2026. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
On September 28, 2016, the restrictive covenants for the Independent Nail property were filed with the Beaufort County Register of Deeds. The restrictive covenants specifically limits groundwater use and future land use and prohibits disturbance of the protective cover over the waste monolith Concurrent with ongoing maintenance, monitoring and five-year reviews, required institutional controls that prevent future exposure to contaminated material within the waste monolith are in place. Furthermore, the institutional controls that protect integrity of the waste monolith and are in place. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
The EPA was unable to identify any viable potentially responsible parties for the site. The EPA used federal funds for site cleanup activities.
Top of Page