GEIGER (C & M OIL)HOLLYWOOD, SC
  Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 1.5-acre Geiger (C & M Oil) Superfund site is located on Highway 162 in Hollywood (formerly Rantowles), 10 miles west of Charleston in Charleston County, South Carolina Two ponds and a forested area border the site. The site’s broader surroundings include forested areas and rural residential areas. Currently, Pile Drivers Incorporated owns the site property and operates an office and stores equipment on site. The site can support industrial land uses. From 1969 to 1974, Adams Run Services, Inc. incinerated waste oil at the site. Operations used eight unlined on-site lagoons to hold waste oil. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1984 because of contaminated groundwater and soil resulting from facility operations. EPA and the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC) Exithave investigated site. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the site. By monitoring the site, placing institutional controls on the site property and undertaking Five-Year Reviews, EPA and SCDHEC continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
EPA led site investigation and cleanup activities in cooperation with SCDHEC. SCDHEC leads site operation and maintenance activities. 1987
EPA issued the cleanup plan for the site. It included
using an on-site pump-and-treat system to address contaminated groundwater and discharging treated groundwater
digging up, stabilizing, solidifying and treating contaminated soil, followed by backfilling the treated soil into dug-up areas.
1993
EPA revised the cleanup plan for soil, removing on-site treatment of contaminated soil as part of the cleanup. EPA stabilized and solidified contaminated soil at the site. 1998
EPA revised the groundwater remedy, changing groundwater treatment to monitored natural attenuation. EPA continues to monitor site conditions. SCDHEC continues to conduct operation and maintenance activities at the site. 2004
EPA installed and sampled temporary wells to evaluate groundwater contamination. EPA also abandoned and decommissioned several wells where the Agency did not identify contamination.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The latest Five Year Review was published in 2024. The remedy at the Site is protective of human health and the environment.
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
EPA has placed institutional controls on the site property to prohibit disturbance of the capped area on site. EPA has also placed a fence around the capped area.
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
EPA initially used federal funds for site cleanup activities. In 2000, the EPA entered into a legal agreement with potentially responsible parties (PRPs) Charleston Packaging Co. and Textron Inc. This agreement resulted in the reimbursement of $55,654 to the Superfund program and placement of $5,626 into a special account for future site cleanup actions. In 2000, the EPA also entered into legal agreement with the remaining PRPs. This agreement resulted in the reimbursement of $5,295,156 to the Superfund program and the placement of $535,249 into a special account for future site cleanup actions.
