ELMORE WASTE DISPOSALGREER, SC 
  Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 8-acre Elmore Waste Disposal Superfund Site is located in a residential area of the City of Greer in Spartanburg County, South Carolina. Between 1975 and 1977, a large number of drums containing liquid waste were placed on the site property. In 1977, the property owner signed a Consent Order with the State of South Carolina for cleanup of the Site property. In 1979, SCDHEC notified the property owner that the terms of the Consent Order had not been complied with and instructed the property owner to stop use of the Site property as a disposal area. Between 1981 and 1984, SCDHEC and the EPA investigated Site conditions and found more than 250 decaying drums with unknown contents. Sampling detected elevated levels of arsenic, chromium, and other heavy metals as well as volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in site soils. The EPA’s 1992 remedial Sinvestigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) identified a quarter-acre area of soil with lead and arsenic concentrations above health-based residential standards at the western end of the site property (Source Area 1). It also identified a groundwater contaminant plume extending about 1,100 feet north from the property. The plume consists primarily of two VOCs – trichloroethylene (TCE) and tetrachloroethylene (PCE). The EPA placed the ite on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) on March 31, 1989. 
Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
1977-1979 In 1977, the property owner agreed to clean up the Site. In 1979, the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (now the department of Environmental Services) notified the property owner to stop using the Site, because the owner had not started clean up activities. 1981 - 1984 The EPA and SCDES conducted Site investigations and found more than 250 decaying drums with unknown contents. Sampling detected elevated levels of arsenic, chromium, and other heavy metals as well as volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in Site soils. 1986
SCDHEC removed 5,500 tons of contaminated soil and 16,800 pounds of liquid wastes, disposed of the material at an off-site facility SCDHEC installed monitoring wells at the Site. 1993
The EPA completed the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) in 1993 which required soil removal and groundwater treatment using pump-and-treat technology. 1994
The EPA excavated and disposed of 350 cubic yards of contaminated soil. 1997 – 1999
The EPA constructed the groundwater pump-and-treat system between 1997 and 1999. 1997 - 2008 The EPA extracted and treated an estimated 74 million gallons of groundwater containing an estimated 720 pounds of VOC contamination. 2009 SCDHEC took over responsibility and maintenance of the groundwater pump-and-treat system. 2016 The EPA conducted additional work to address VOC contamination and collected groundwater sampling data of the two VOC source areas. 2017  The ﻿EPA completed In Situ Chemical Oxidation injection to breakdown VOCs in source areas. 2018 The ﻿EPA completed the fourth Five-year Review (FYR) for the Site. The EPA determined that the remedy for the Site is protective of human health and the environment because there are no completed exposure pathways for contaminated groundwater. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published in 2023. The remedy at the Site currently protects human health and the environment because there are no completed exposure pathways. SCDES is operating the groundwater pump-and-treat system and monitoring groundwater quality across the Site.  Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
Institutional Controls are in place for the majority of the area known to be impacted with groundwater contamination. In addition, all of the residents living in the area known to be impacted by groundwater contamination are connected to the local public water works. The Elmore Waste Disposal site is currently in continued use. A laundromat is located on a portion of the Site. Top of Page
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of the EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, the EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
In 1977, SCDHEC negotiated legal agreements with the property owner to clean up the Site. In 1979, SCDHEC notified the property owner to stop using the site because the owner had not cleaned up the Site. From 1980 until 2009, the EPA used federal funds for site cleanup activities. In 2009, SCDHEC took over cleanup activities.
Top of Page