Cleanup Activities
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Enforcement Information
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Burlington Industries Cheraw site consists of the former Burlington Industries, Inc. Superfund facility property, 3.2 miles of surface water drainage from the facility to the Great Pee Dee River and several adjacent parcels along the surface water pathway where contamination is located. The manufacturing facility was known as the James Fabrics Plant and produced woven fiberglass commercial and industrial fabrics. Part of the former Burlington Industries, Inc. facility is currently owned by Highland Industries, Inc. (a division of Takata Corporation). Adjacent properties to the surface water drainage corridor include 37 occupied private residences and public lands. Contained within the public land tracts is Huckleberry Park (a 2.7-acre public park with playground equipment for children).  During the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control’s (DHEC’s)Exit investigation of a residential property, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) Exitwere found in surface soil. This residential property, along with other area parcels, were formerly owned by Burlington Industries; one currently undeveloped property was used by Burlington for drying wastewater solids. PCBs are toxic and persistent contaminants that pose a significant threat to human health and the environment. Subsequent sampling events found PCBs in surface and subsurface soil of adjacent residential lots, the former Burlington Industries facility property, sediment along the surface water corridor, and public and private properties downstream. Based on the high concentrations of PCBs at the site, DHEC requested that EPA conduct a Removal Site Evaluation. The EPA determined that the site qualifies for inclusion on EPA's National Priorities List (NPL). EPA proposed the site to the NPL in January 2018 and finalized it on the NPL on May 17, 2018. The EPA entered an Administrative Order by Consent (AOC) with Highland Industries on June 20, 2019. This AOC requires Highland to perform a remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) at the Site. The RI/FS will seek to evaluate presence and options for remedial action to address remaining PCBs in the environment including additional residential properties downstream, undeveloped properties, downstream tributaries, ponds, creeks, wetlands, and the Pee Dee River. The initial round of sampling under this settlement agreement commenced on June 15, 2021 under the oversight of EPA and South Carolina Department of Environmental Control (SCDHEC). The RI/FS field sampling began the week of July 19, 2021.
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
2017
The EPA conducted a fund-lead time critical removal action that addressed contaminated surface soils at fourteen residential yards. Soils which exceed EPA’s cleanup criteria were removed and transported off-site to an approved disposal facility. Additionally, the EPA removed play structures and sand from Huckleberry Park, which has been closed since August of 2016. The EPA signed an Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent (AOC) for Removal Action with Highland Industries for a removal action. The effective date of the AOC is October 23, 2017. 2018 – 2019
After a planning and assessment period, removal work under the 2017 AOC began on August 6, 2018 with excavation of contaminated soil at Huckleberry Park. Excavation work at the park was completed and clean backfill was installed prior to the arrival of Hurricane Florence. Removal of contaminated soil at the Highland property began on October 1, 2018 and excavations outside the ditch were completed in February 2019. The final phase of removal work under the AOC included excavation and restoration of the drainage ditch from the Highland property to the end of Pecan Drive. Excavation work in the ditch began on January 28, 2019. Contaminated soils were measured at depths greater than 14-feet below ground surface and significant excavation work was undertaken to address these areas. In March 2019, soil core samples were collected along the center of the ditch banks of the ditch, which were addressed under the current removal work. Following Hurricanes Florence and Michael in 2018, the EPA ordered sampling in Huckleberry Park and collected samples from 25 residential yards and samples from creek sediment that was removed from Wilson Branch. Results from samples in the park and creek sediment were below the cleanup goals that have been established for the Site. Results in most residential lawns were also below the cleanup goals that have been established for the Site. PCBs were found in four (4) lawns that were previously cleaned in 2017; the EPA arranged to remove the contaminated sod and replace it with clean sod. One additional yard, which was not previously cleaned in 2017, was found to have soil that exceeded the EPA’s criteria for conducting a removal action. Soils which exceeded EPA’s cleanup criteria were removed and transported to an approved disposal facility. Clean soil was returned to residential property and vegetative ground cover was installed. Samples collected after Hurricane Florence identified PCBs inside four residences that were flooded during the storm. In response to these results, the EPA initiated an emergency response on September 25, 2018 to remove sediment from the interior of the four residences. The emergency response was completed on October 3, 2018 and displaced occupants returned to their homes. Additionally, in July 2019, the EPA mobilized to the Site and excavated soil and sediment along a portion of the Western Ditch upstream from the culvert under Pinewood Drive. This work concluded the last of the planned emergency response actions planned for the Site. All known high concentrations and sources of PCBs in the environment have been addressed by the removal and emergency response actions taken by EPA and the consent agreement with Highland Industries, Inc.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The EPA entered an Administrative Order by Consent (AOC) with Highland Industries on June 20, 2019. This AOC requires Highland to perform a remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) at the Site. The RI/FS will seek to evaluate presence and options for remedial action to address remaining PCBs in the environment including additional residential properties downstream, undeveloped properties, downstream tributaries, ponds, creeks, wetlands, and the Pee Dee River. The initial round of sampling under this settlement agreement commenced on July 19, 2021 under the oversight of EPA and South Carolina Department of Environmental Control (SCDHEC). The work to be completed under the RI/FS Workplan will take approximately 12-18 months and will include a RI Report, Human Health Risk Assessment (HHRA), Ecological Risk Assessment (ERA) and Feasibility Study which will propose and evaluate options for remediating the Site. Additionally, the property where Burlington once operated wastewater settling ponds (north of the site along Pecan Drive) will be investigated by the EPA, not Highland. This sampling event is scheduled for the week of August 23, 2021. Once the RI/FS is complete the EPA will prepare the Proposed Plan for the site and brief the community on the plan. This will be followed by a public comment period.
Enforcement Information
Enforcing environmental laws is a central part of EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. When warranted, EPA will take civil or criminal enforcement action against violators of environmental laws.
EPA has prepared a draft Statement of Work and notice letters to commence negotiation of an RI/FS Administrative of Consent. If a PRP is unwilling or unable to conduct the RI/FS, EPA will proceed using federal funds (Fund-lead).
