TENNESSEE PRODUCTSCHATTANOOGA, TN 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The Tennessee Products Superfund Site is located in Chattanooga, Tennessee. The site is located immediately west of downtown Chattanooga, Hamilton County, Tennessee. Industrial land uses surround the Site. Low-income and minority residents live in houses along the creek. Tennessee Products operated a coal carbonization facility near Chattanooga Creek from 1918 to 1987. It includes an area where dumping of coal-tar wastes affected Chattanooga Creek The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency placed the Site on the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1995 because of contaminated groundwater, sediment, soil and surface water resulting from facility operations. The EPA, the Tennessee Department of Environmental Conservation (TDEC) and the Site’s potentially responsible parties (PRPs) have investigated site conditions. By undertaking Five-Year Reviews, the EPA, TDEC and the Site’s PRPs continue to protect people and the environment from site contamination. Site contamination does not currently threaten people living and working near the Site. However, a fish advisory remains in effect for fish caught from Chattanooga Creek. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The EPA led site cleanup activities in 1998 in cooperation with TDEC. The Site’s PRPs led cleanup activities between 2005 and 2007, with oversight provided by the EPA and TDEC. 
When﻿
What﻿
﻿1993
The EPA fenced a section of Chattanooga Creek to prevent public access.
﻿1998
The EPA completed short-term cleanup activities on the upper reach of Chattanooga Creek. Cleanup activities included removing coal and tar deposits and contaminated sediments along a one-mile section of the creek between Hamill Road and 1,200 feet north of the 38th Street Bridge. 
25,000 cubic yards of coal, tar and contaminated sediment were removed from the creek.
1,150 cubic yards of pesticide-contaminated sediment were removed from the creek and disposed of the sediment at a local municipal landfill.
﻿2002 - 2004
The site’s long-term remedy, selected in 2002 and updated in 2004, included digging up sediments from Chattanooga Creek and a spoil pile along the Northeast Tributary, disposing of the material at a local municipal landfill, and stabilizing disturbed creek banks.
﻿2005 - 2007
The site’s PRPs led cleanup activities between 2005 and 2007, with oversight provided by EPA and TDEC. During this time: 
about 108,000 tons of stabilized sediment was dug up from the creek channel and transported it to an off-site landfill for disposal
a cap was placed over 5,750 feet of the creek channel to prevent potential recontamination from non-aqueous phase liquid in the subsurface of the sediment.
﻿2016
﻿The EPA completed the second Five Year Review.
2019
The EPA deleted the site from the National Priorites List and anticipates no further cleanup activites.
Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The most recent Five Year Review was published in 2016. The remedy at the Tennessee Products Site remains protective of human health and the environment, both in the short term and long term. Site maintenance and monitoring is ongoing. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
A fish advisory remains in effect for fish caught from Chattanooga Creek. Top of Page