ICG ISELIN RAILROAD YARDJACKSON, TN 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Activity and Use Limitations
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 80-acre ICG Iselin Railroad Yard Superfund site is located at the intersection of Eastern Street and Magnolia Street in Jackson, Tennessee. A residential area that includes low-income and minority residents borders the site to the north. Wooded and agricultural areas border the site to the west, east and south. The Jackson Energy Authority’s South Well Field is located 1,785 feet west of the site. Beginning in the early 1900s, operations at the site have included engine repair, radiator repair, diesel refueling and general maintenance. Historically, a main warehouse, numerous railroad tracks, storage tanks, a battery waste disposal pile, a rail-car fueling platform and a pollution control system were located at the site. 
In 1940, Gulf Mobile and Ohio Railroad Company purchased the Mobile and Ohio Railroad Company. Gulf Mobile and Ohio Railroad Company continued to use the facility as a rail yard.
In 1972, the company reorganized as the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad Company (ICG Railroad).
In 1986, Williams Steel Company purchased a large part of the site and used the area as a steel fabrication facility until 1989.
In 1989, Iselin Properties, Inc., assumed ownership of the Williams Steel Company property. ICG Railroad sold the remaining portion of the site property to the Southern Railway Company (which became Norfolk Southern in 1988).      
In 1990 and 1991, the Tennessee Division of Remediation (TDOR) found contaminated soil and groundwater. Further investigations by TDOR and EPA determined that improper handling of storage tanks, fueling stations and disposal areas on site resulted in lead contamination of soil and groundwater. EPA added the site to the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 1994. TDEC and the site's potential responsible parties (PRPs) completed long-term cleanup activities in 1999. In 2002, EPA took the site off the NPL.   The forth Five Year Review concluded that the ROD Selected Alternative, implementing institutional controls through deed restrictions was found to be protective of human health and the environment.  A water line connects residences and businesses to the public water supply. Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
 Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation (TDEC), with the help of the site’s PRPs, leads site investigation and cleanup activities, with oversight provided by EPA. 1992
EPA and TDEC conducted the site’s remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) from 1992 to 1993. 1998
In 1998, TDEC and the site’s PRPs conducted a non-time-critical removal action. Cleanup activities included digging up 716 tons of contaminated soil and disposing of it at an off-site facility as well as backfilling the dug-up area. TDEC and the PRPs also placed a clay cap over a buried rail tie area as part of additional cleanup activities in 1998. TDEC and the PRPs completed long-term cleanup activities in 1999. 1999
In 1999, EPA issued the site’s long-term cleanup plan. It included placing institutional controls on the site property to prohibit residential uses and well drilling for residential purposes. 2002
Following completion of cleanup activities, EPA took the site off the NPL in 2002. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
The forth Five Year Review, published by EPA HQ in 2020, concluded that the ROD Selected Alternative, implementing institutional controls through deed restrictions was found to be protective of human health and the environment. The ROD Selected Alternative requiring institutional controls through deed restrictions has been found to be protective of human health and the environment. The fifth Five-Year Review is currently ongoing for 2025. Top of Page
Activity and Use Limitations
At this site, activity and use limitations that EPA calls institutional controls are in place. Institutional controls play an important role in site remedies because they reduce exposure to contamination by limiting land or resource use.
They also guide human behavior. For instance, zoning restrictions prevent land uses – such as residential uses – that are not consistent with the level of cleanup.
 For more background, see Institutional Controls.
EPA restricts residential groundwater use. Top of Page