LONGHORN ARMY AMMUNITION PLANTKARNACK, TX 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
 The 8,416-acre Longhorn Army Ammunition Plant (LHAAP) installation is located between State Highway 43 and Caddo Lake in Karnack, Harrison County, Texas, approximately 14 miles northeast of Marshall, Texas, and approximately 40 miles northwest of Shreveport, Louisiana. The site is in a rural area and operated from 1942 to 1997, historically manufacturing TNT, rocket motors and various pyrotechnic items. In January of 1990, LHAAP remained an important source of employment for the surrounding communities, with over 900 employees, including contractor, civilian, and Army. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) listed the site on the National Priorities List in August 1990 after facility operations and chemical releases resulted in the contamination of soil and groundwater with volatile organic compounds, perchlorate (although it was not identified as an emerging contaminant until a number of years later), metals, and explosives.  Remedial activities have been implemented for multiple site areas with a range of approaches being utilized, including land use controls, groundwater monitoring, capping, in-situ bioremediation, monitored natural attenuation (MNA), soil removal, munitions and explosives of concern (MEC) clearance, and groundwater extraction and treatment. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
 Longhorn Army Ammunition Plant (LHAAP) is broken down into various operable units (OU) that are in different phases of the CERCLA processes. The US Army is the lead agency tasked with the remediation of the Longhorn Army Ammunition Superfund site. The EPA along with TCEQ provide regulatory oversight to all activities conducted at the LHAAP site. Each OU has a Record of Decision (ROD), the document that outlines the contamination at each site and describes the selected remedy, or treatment at each unit. Once the ROD is completed the Army will draft the remedial design (RD), that explains in detail how they will implement the plans in the ROD. Once the RD is complete, the Army will then construct the remedial actions (RA) that will allow for the cleanup of the OU over time. Once the RA is completed the OU enters long-term monitoring. The US Army, with oversight by USEPA and TCEQ, conduct regular sampling and draft reports detailing the progress at each OU. These reports ensure that there is no migration of contamination offsite and verify that there is no exposure to human populations. These reports also assess the degradation of the contamination through monitored natural attenuation (MNA). Through MNA the contamination is broken down through different natural processes and will help the site reach its cleanup goals within a reasonable timeframe.  In addition, a ground water treatment plant is operated and maintained for treatment of groundwater extracted from operable units sites LHAAP-17, LHAAP-18 and LHAAP-24. The water is pumped from the groundwater units to the treatment plant where the water is treated and then released to the bayou following sampling confimation. 
Top of Page