Cleanup Activities
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
Emergency Response and Removal
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
Current Site Status The Remedial Action and cleanup was completed according to the requirements of the Record of Decision and there is no longer a threat to human health and the environment.  Institutional controls (i.e., deed restrictions) are in place and have been recorded at the local county offices to ensure that the Site’s use remains industrial/commercial. Operation and maintenance activities and monitoring are ongoing. Site Background The 17-acre Palmer Barge Line site is located on Pleasure Inlet, 4.5 miles east-northeast of Port Arthur in Jefferson County, Texas. The site, along with the adjacent properties to the north and south, was used as a municipal landfill for Port Arthur from 1956 to 1987. Between 1982 and 1997, a barge-cleaning company also operated on site. Facility operations contaminated soil and groundwater with hazardous chemicals. Following the site’s cleanup, EPA took the site off the Superfund program’s National Priorities List (NPL) in 2012. National Priorities Listing (NPL) History
Proposal Date: March 06, 1998
Final Listing Date: July 28, 2000
Population: Approximately 61,000 people live in the City of Port Arthur.
Setting: The owner is currently using the Site as an industrial property and land use surrounding the Site is industrial.

What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions. EPA has conducted several five-year reviews of the site’s remedy. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and function as intended by site decision documents. The most recent review concluded that response actions at the site are in accordance with the remedy selected by EPA and that the remedy continues to be protective of human health and the environment. Removal of contaminated soils and other contaminated media that presented a risk to human health and ecological receptors permanently removed the source of contamination from the site. The area can now be developed for commercial and industrial purposes. An institutional control in the form of restrictive covenant by the property owner, to the benefit of the State of Texas and the United States Government, was filed in appropriate property records at the Jefferson County Clerk’s office in March 2011. This institutional control ensures that future site use will remain commercial/industrial.
The site, along with adjacent properties to the north and south, was used as a municipal landfill for Port Arthur from 1956 to 1987. In April 1982, John Palmer, President of Palmer Barge Line Inc., purchased about 17 acres from the City of Port Arthur for the purpose of servicing and maintaining barges and marine vessels. The company ceased operations on the site property in July 1997. During operations, typical activities at the site included cleaning, degassing, maintenance and inspection of barges and other marine equipment. Cleaning operations included the removal of sludge and other residual material by pressure steaming vessel holds, engines and boilers. Engines were degreased and accumulations of sludges were removed. Degassing activities involved the removal of explosive vapors from vessel holds using nitrogen or boiler exhaust. Maintenance and inspection activities included the replacement and/or repair of valves, engines and line leaks followed by pressure tests. A flare was located on site to burn excess gases and liquids produced during facility operations. The site, along with adjacent properties to the north and south, was used as a municipal landfill for Port Arthur from 1956 to 1987. In April 1982, John Palmer, President of Palmer Barge Line Inc., purchased about 17 acres from the City of Port Arthur for the purpose of servicing and maintaining barges and marine vessels. The company ceased operations on the site property in July 1997. During operations, typical activities at the site included cleaning, degassing, maintenance and inspection of barges and other marine equipment. Cleaning operations included the removal of sludge and other residual material by pressure steaming vessel holds, engines and boilers. Engines were degreased and accumulations of sludges were removed. Degassing activities involved the removal of explosive vapors from vessel holds using nitrogen or boiler exhaust. Maintenance and inspection activities included the replacement and/or repair of valves, engines and line leaks followed by pressure tests. A flare was located on site to burn excess gases and liquids produced during facility operations.
What Is the Current Site Status?
The site’s long-term remedy, selected in 2005, included excavation and off-site disposal of 181 tons of contaminated soils, backfilling of excavated areas with clean soil, abandonment of five existing groundwater monitoring wells, sludge removal, decontamination and off-site disposal, and implementation of institutional controls. After cleanup, EPA took the site off the NPL in 2012. EPA has completed the FY 2022 Five Year Review (FYR) for the Site on July 1, 2022. The FYR is a document that determines whether or not a Site is protective of human and environmental health. The remedy for the Palmer Barge Line Superfund site is protective of human health and the environment. This document was uploaded to the Site webpage on July 13, 2022 and is now available at the local repository.
Emergency Response and Removal
Cleanup has also included removal actions, or short-term cleanups, to address immediate threats to human health and the environment. In August 2000, a time-critical removal action by EPA removed hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants and disposed of them off site. The action consisted of waste removal, water treatment, oil/water separation and sludge stabilization. About 250,000 gallons of water were treated on site, 500 cubic yards of sludge were stabilized, and 100,000 gallons of oil/styrene were separated and removed from the site.
