ELDORADO CHEMICAL CO., INC.LIVE OAK, TX 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
Site History:
Eldorado Chemical Co., Inc. was a former manufacturer of cleaning products from 1978 through 2007. The site is located northeast of the city of San Antonio in the suburb of Live Oak, Bexar County, Texas. The site consists of a ground water plume of chlorinated solvents originating from historical releases of chemicals used in the facility’s manufacturing operations. Site Contamination:
Soil and ground water are contaminated with chlorinated solvents including, tetrachloroethene, trichloroethene, dichloroethene and vinyl chloride. These contaminants were found within the alluvial ground water with the potential to release into the underlying Edwards Aquifer. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:
An estimated 215,722 residents in the city of Live Oak, city of Universal City, city of Selma, city of Converse, Randolph Air Force Base, and city of San Antonio receive drinking water from ground water. This population may potentially be exposed to the contaminants that resulted from historical manufacturing operations. No federal response actions have been taken. The property owner conducted limited cleanup activities between 1984 and 1986, including the removal of soil at visibly contaminated areas. Need for NPL Listing:
The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) referred the site to the EPA due to the chlorinated solvent plume, use of ground water for drinking, and the presence of geologic conditions favorable for migration of contaminants. Without identification and investigation of the source of ground water contamination and remediation of the contaminated ground water plume, public and private wells may be contaminated. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Texas. Top of Page