BANDERA ROAD GROUND WATER PLUMESAN ANTONIO, TX 
  Cleanup Activities 
On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
National Priorities Listing (NPL) History
NPL Proposal Date: September 26, 2006
NPL Final Date: March 7, 2007  
The Site is located in the City of Leon Valley, Bexar County, on the northwest side of San Antonio, Texas.  The site is located in a commercial and industrial area of Leon Valley. Residences are located nearby. Two City of Leon Valley public water supply wells are within one mile of the center of the site. The San Antonio Water System Wurzbach and Evers Road public water supply wells are about 1.1 miles from the center of the site. 
The site consists of two Area of Interest (AOI), aka Source Areas: AOI 1: Area near the Savings Square Shopping Center (6709 Bandera Road, San Antonio, TX 78238) where a previous dry-cleaning facility operated. AOI 2: Area near a defunct dry-cleaning facility (6600 Bandera Road, San Antonio, TX 78238) 
The 2013 Record of Decision (ROD) selected the following remedy for the site: Soil vapor extraction to address contaminated surface and subsurface soils for Source Areas 1 and 2. Soil vapor extraction to address contaminated vadose zone bedrock for Source Areas 1 and 2. Bioremediation to address the Austin Chalk Aquifer’s Northern Plume and Southern Plume. Installation of a protective barrier to address contaminated indoor air for Source Area 1 –Building 1. 
The 2020 Final Remedial Design (RD) Report details the engineering plans, drawings, and specifications for the Remedial Action (RA). Both the ROD and Final RD Report can be found and downloaded, along with additional information, at: https://www.epa.gov/superfund/bandera-road and https://www.leonvalleytexas.gov/bc-cag Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
Residents are connected to city public water. 
Temporary vapor mitigation exhaust system have been installed at Savings Square. EPA and Edwards Aquifer Authority (EAA) plugged and abandoned improperly constructed and deteriorating wells near plumes. Groundwater sampling is continuing to ensure that the plumes are stable. Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
 This site is one of many across the country to receive funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which invested $3.5 billion in environmental remediation at Superfund sites on the National Priorities List. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding will be used to implement groundwater restoration and soil vapor extraction at this site.
Currently, EPA is in the Remedial Action phase which is the field implementation of remedy components identfied in the 2013 Record of Decision and the 2020 Remedial Design. 
Top of Page