Cleanup Activities 
Sign up for this Superfund site’s mailing list
 On this page:
Background
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
What Is the Current Site Status?
 On related pages:
Operable Units
Cleanup Progress
Background
The 446-acre Midvale Slag site is in Midvale City and Murray City, Utah. Five lead and copper smelters operated at the site between 1871 and 1958. In addition to lead and copper, the facility produced other metals, including arsenic, cadmium, zinc, gold and silver.  ​During World War II, the smelters produced many tons of arsenic trioxide for the United States government to be used as herbicides. Wastes generated from the smelting process were disposed of on-site and contaminated groundwater and soil. The smelter facilities were demolished in the 1970s.   ​The EPA cleaned up the site and it was removed from the list of Superfund sites in 2015. Today the site has been developed into Bingham Junction. This includes homes, offices, and stores.  ​The site is now in operation and maintenance.​  Top of Page
What Has Been Done to Clean Up the Site?
The site is being addressed through federal, state and potentially responsible party (PRP) actions.  ​The EPA has conducted five-year reviews at the site. These reviews ensure that the remedies put in place protect public health and the environment, and work as planned by site decision documents. Learn more under What is the Current Site Status? ​Drinking water is provided by the Jordan Valley Water Conservation District. Groundwater use is being restricted by the Salt Lake Valley Ground Water Management Plan and the Midvale City ordinance. The ordinance also describes the procedures for workers handling soils at depth and Midvale City staff oversee any redevelopment projects.  Fourth Five-Year Review Report (pdf)t  (125 pp, 53.3 MB, About PDF) ​In April 2015, the EPA, state, and local agency representatives joined business leaders and elected officials and staff at the FLSmidth Plaza in Midvale City to celebrate the removal of the Midvale Slag site from EPA’s Superfund list. Also at the ceremony, Region 8 presented the second “Excellence in Site Reuse” awards to the Midvale City, Utah, for their efforts to reuse and redevelop the Midvale Slag Superfund site into Bingham Junction. EPA deleted the site from the National Priorities List because all required cleanup activity at the site is complete. This marks 20-plus years of collaboration and dedication at the federal, state, and local level to transform a once contaminated land into a thriving development.   Top of Page
What Is the Current Site Status?
Based on the January 2024 Updated Lead Guidance, the EPA is evaluating the risks from lead in soils to sensitive populations. This analysis will include compiling available site data to determine the potential presence and extent of lead-contaminated soils. Lead can pose health risks to sensitive populations, especially children under 7 years old and pregnant or nursing women. The process to implement the Updated Lead Guidance will involve additional planning, data gathering, risk assessment and funding requests. The EPA will coordinate with our state partners and request public feedback on our proposed cleanup plans before additional cleanups begin, if it is determined that additional cleanup is needed.   While implementing the Updated Lead Guidance may take up to three years to complete, the EPA and Utah Department of Environmental Quality will share information on planned activities and results as they become available. In the meantime, and out of an abundance of caution, if you live near the Midvale Slag Superfund Site, the EPA recommends you have your children tested for lead annually; especially those under 7 and if the soil at your property was not replaced previously. Additionally, you can take some simple actions to limit exposure to potential lead contamination in soils, including:  
Maintaining yards and other soil cover;  
Washing hands, especially children’s, after handling soil, playing outside, and before meals; 
Making sure children eat nutritious meals high in iron and calcium; 
Keeping dust levels down by mopping and damp dusting regularly;  
Regularly changing out furnace filters; 
Keeping kids’ toys and play areas clean; 
Taking shoes off at the door and keeping pets clean; 
Wearing gloves while gardening; and 
Cleaning homegrown produce and peeling root vegetables.  
The EPA Midvale Slag Superfund Site team will communicate with residents affected by this guidance about the specific next steps the Agency will take in their community. Residents may also contact the site’s Community Involvement Coordinator with questions or concerns at (haniewicz.missy@epa.gov) or 720-415-4609. The site is divided into two areas called Operable Units or OUs. OU1 is the northern 266 acres of the site. OU2 is the remaining 180 acres to the south. The dividing boundary between OU1 and OU2 is slightly south of 7200 South, which cuts across the middle of the site. 
In 1990, the EPA started cleanup work to address immediate threats at the site. The EPA removed chemicals found in an abandoned lab, detonated about 20 pounds of explosives and fenced the site to prevent public access.   The long-term work plan for OU1, selected in 1995, included removing and replacing yard soils at Winchester Estates, a small residential development at the northern end of the site. The remedy also included groundwater monitoring and institutional controls.   In 1996, contaminated soil was excavated from the Butterfield Lumber portion of OU2 and from the small, unmarked Pioneer Cemetery.  In 1998, EPA updated the plan to excavate contaminated soils on one additional parcel of land. In 2006, EPA again updated the plan to change land use restrictions  so that there could be multiple land uses. The update also created a  plan for management of the wetlands, stream and river. There was also a groundwater monitoring plan that was consistent for both OUs. Cleanup at OU1 is complete.  EPA selected the long-term plan for OU2 in 2002. EPA divided OU2 cleanup into three parts:   
smelter waste and slag 
groundwater  
riparian zone (wetlands, stream, and river)   
Cleanup of the smelter waste and slag included regrading, installation of a vegetated soil cover and institutional controls. This work finished in 2007. A monitoring system makes sure that groundwater from the site does not go over state water quality standards in the Jordan River.   The OU2 plan also required making a community group to focus on restoring and stabilizing the banks of the Jordan River as it flows through the western portion of the site.  From 2008 through 2010, the EPA made the Jordan River Riparian Improvement Project. Work included:   
removal of a damaged sheet pile dam from the river that was a relic of past mining activities  
installation of a new dam structure to stabilize the riverbed slope and prevent potential riverbank erosion 
installation of additional stabilization measures and flow control devices 
revegetation with native and riparian wetland plants  
The site achieved Superfund “construction complete” status in September 2011.  In 2015, EPA deleted the site from the National Priorities List because all required cleanup activity at the site was completed.  Top of Page