Site Name and Location
Site Name: Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor Superfund Site
Location: Bainbridge Island, Kitsap County, Washington
Latitude: 47.61535 North; Longitude: -122.49986 West
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Identification Number: WAD 009248295
Statement of Basis and Purpose
This document presents the decision by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)1 to implement
additional cleanup actions at the Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor Superfund Site (the Site or site) in Bainbridge Island,
Kitsap County, Washington. This decision amends the 1994 Record of Decision (ROD) for the East Harbor
Operable Unit (OU) 1 (OU1) (EPA, 1994)2 and the 2000 ROD for upland OU2 and OU4 (soil and groundwater
OUs, respectively) (EPA, 2000a). The additional cleanup actions include dredging and capping contaminated
beach sediments, improving the access road, and replacing the aging perimeter steel sheet pile wall. These
actions were chosen in accordance with the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980, United States Code Title 42, Section 9601 et seq., as amended by the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and
Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 300, as
amended. This decision is based on the Administrative Record for the site. The State of Washington, acting
through the Washington Department of Ecology, concurs with the Selected Remedy.
Site Assessment
The Selected Remedy in this Interim Record of Decision Amendment (RODA) is necessary to protect the
public health, welfare, and/or environment from actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances into
the environment or from actual or threatened releases of pollutants or contaminants from the site that may
present an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health or welfare.
Description of the Selected Remedy
In the intertidal beaches adjacent to the former Wyckoff wood-treating facility, the current remedy is
monitored natural recovery; this remedy in this portion of the site is not functioning as designed.
Contaminant concentrations exceed cleanup goals in several beach areas. This Interim RODA modifies the
1994 cleanup decision for portions of the intertidal beaches with the decision to remove contaminated
sediments through dredging and off-site disposal and install a cap to contain any potential future
nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL) seepage. Dredging and capping will treat or remove source materials
constituting principal threats in the intertidal portion of OU1 adjacent to the former Wyckoff wood-treating
facility.
The Selected Remedy for the intertidal beaches adjacent to the former wood-treating area includes the
following activities:
• Dredging approximately 6,600 cubic yards of contaminated sediment from select areas
• Backfilling dredged areas with a multilayer cap, including placing reactive materials (such as oleophilic
clay or other reagents) at the base of the cap to retard upward NAPL seepage, then restoring dredged
areas to grade with clean, imported materials
• Disposing of dredged sediments off site (landfill)
• Monitoring to confirm dredged and backfilled areas remain clean
• Monitoring outside active cleanup areas to confirm natural recovery effectiveness
• Implementing institutional controls to prohibit marine construction activities that could disturb the
capped areas of the beach.
In the upland (OU2 and OU4) portion of the former Wyckoff wood-treating facility, the current remedy is
containment. A steel sheet pile wall around the perimeter of the facility is a key element of the containment
system. The above-ground portion of the wall is corroding rapidly and must be replaced to prevent
contaminated groundwater, creosote, and contaminated soils from eroding into Puget Sound. The Selected
Remedy involves constructing a new reinforced concrete wall, to be built adjacent to the outboard/seaward
side of the existing wall. The Selected Remedy also includes making improvements to the existing access
road. The improvements, which will reduce the steep grade over a portion of the road and straighten a
sharp curve, are needed to transport large construction equipment and materials to the work area.
Statutory Determinations
The Selected Remedy will protect human health and the environment, comply with federal and State
requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate within the scope of this interim remedial
action, be cost effective, and use permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the extent
practicable for this site.
The Selected Remedy will satisfy the statutory preference for treatment as a principal element of the
remedy by treating dredged sediment contaminated with NAPL if necessary to reduce contaminant mobility
before transport and disposal in a landfill and by using reactive materials in the base of the cap to intercept
and adsorb upwelling NAPL.
The Selected Remedy will address two immediate needs at the site: (1) ongoing human exposure to
contaminants on the beaches, and (2) potential for failure of the current perimeter wall. Additional actions
needed to address contaminated soils and groundwater in the upland portion of the former wood-treating
facility will be presented in a future decision document. Because this remedy will result in hazardous
substances, pollutants, or contaminants remaining on site above levels that allow for unlimited use and
unrestricted exposure, a statutory review will be conducted within 5 years after the remedial action is
initiated to ensure that the remedy protects, or will protect, human health and the environment.

1.0 SiteName, Location, andBriefDescription
The Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor Superfund Site (EPA Identification Number WAD009248295) is located on the
east side of Bainbridge Island in central Puget Sound (Figure 1), at 5350 Creosote Place NE, Bainbridge
Island, Washington. The Site includes the former Wyckoff Company wood‐treating facility on the south
shore of Eagle Harbor, more than 70 acres of contaminated subtidal and intertidal sediments in the harbor,
and the upland and in‐water portions of a former shipyard on the harbor’s north shore. Historically, the
Wyckoff Site has been divided into the following four OUs:
 OU1: East Harbor OU includes contaminated intertidal and subtidal sediments in the eastern portion of
Eagle Harbor associated with wood‐treating operations at the former Wyckoff facility.
 OU2: Soils OU includes contaminated surface soil and structures associated with the Former Process
Area (FPA) of the Wyckoff facility.
 OU3: West Harbor OU includes the upland areas and intertidal and subtidal contaminated sediments
associated with former shipyard operations on the north shore of Eagle Harbor.
 OU4: Groundwater OU includes contaminated subsurface soil and groundwater associated with
operations at the FPA of the Wyckoff facility.
OU2 and OU4 are referred to collectively as OU2/4, or the Soils and Groundwater OUs. In this document,
this portion of the Site is also called the former process area or FPA.
EPA is the lead agency for the Site, supported by the Washington Department of Ecology (Ecology). EPA
added the Site to the National Priorities List (NPL) in 1987. Extensive investigation and cleanup activities
have taken place in the intervening 30 years. This interim Record of Decision Amendment (RODA) revises
two existing cleanup decisions: the East Harbor OU (OU1) Record of Decision (1994 ROD; EPA, 1994) and the
Soil and Groundwater OUs (OU2 and OU4) ROD (EPA, 2000a).
The current remedy for intertidal beaches in OU1—monitored natural recovery (MNR)—failed to meet the
ROD’s cleanup goals in portions of the beaches adjacent to the former wood‐treating facility. In 2012,
sampling and analysis revealed that sediments in specific areas of the beaches remained contaminated
above risk‐based cleanup levels 10 years after implementation of source control actions (HDR Engineering,
Inc. [HDR], et al., 2012).
The current remedy in OU2/4—containment—has prevented large‐scale releases of contaminants to Eagle
Harbor. The containment system includes two components: (1) a steel sheet pile wall around the perimeter
of the FPA and (2) groundwater extraction and treatment system. The steel sheet pile wall is corroding
rapidly and is expected to lose structural integrity within 3 to 5 years; therefore, the wall needs to be
replaced soon. The wall must be replaced before any additional cleanup actions are implemented, because
wall failure could cause recontamination of the beaches. Therefore, EPA is addressing both issues—ongoing
contamination in the beaches and replacement of the perimeter wall—in this decision document.

Additional cleanup actions are also being planned to address contamination remaining in upland soils and
groundwater. The cleanup decision for the upland soils and groundwater OUs will be presented in a future
decision document.
2.0 Site History and Enforcement Actions
This section of the RODA summarizes the Site history and briefly discusses of EPA and State removal,
remedial, and enforcement activities.
2.1 History of Site Operations
Suquamish people camped along the Eagle Harbor shoreline for centuries. Two ethnohistoric period and
historic period villages have been recorded in addition to several precontact clamming, fishing, hunting
camps and short-term activity locations. At least one burial location has been documented (Brooks, pers.
comm., 2016). Starting in 1903, a major shipyard was established on the north shore of Eagle Harbor. After
flourishing during World War I, the yard languished during the 1930s. In the 1940s and 1950s, the emphasis
was on constructing and repairing military ships and conducting postwar decommissioning.
Wood-treating operations began on the harbor’s south shore in 1905. From 1905 through 1988, a
succession of companies treated wood for use as railroad ties, utility poles, pier pilings, and wood stave
pipes. By 1910, pressure treatment with creosote or bunker oil had begun. In later years, wood was also
treated with pentachlorophenol (PCP). Early operations took place on docks and pile-supported buildings.
Over time, a series of bulkheads were built, and the area behind them filled, creating the existing upland
area. For decades, logs were treated using heat and pressure inside retorts, which are long, cylindrical tanks
sealed at both ends. Freshly treated wood was removed from the retorts and dried in the open air. Excess
chemical solution that dripped from the wood went directly onto the ground and seeped into the soil and
groundwater. This practice began in the mid-1940s and continued until operations ceased in 1988. Other
significant contaminant releases resulted from leaking storage tanks and piping, storing treated wood in the
water, and using process wastes and sludge as fill between bulkheads in the 1950s.
2.2 Previous Investigations and Cleanup Actions in OU2 and OU4 (Upland Soil and Groundwater)
In 1984, EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order requiring the Wyckoff Company to conduct
environmental investigation activities under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Data
collected at the time revealed the presence of significant soil and groundwater contamination. The Site was
added to the NPL in 1987 and a more thorough remedial investigation (RI) was completed in 1989
(CH2M HILL Engineers, Inc. [CH2M], 1989).
Groundwater extraction and treatment began at selected wells in 1990. In 1993, EPA assumed responsibility
for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the groundwater extraction and treatment system because the
company was financially unable to do so. Between 1992 and 1994, EPA conducted a time-critical removal
action at the facility, removing creosote sludge and contaminated soils, disposing asbestos, constructing a
new bulkhead, and removing and recycling materials left in the retorts and tanks.
In 1994, a Focused Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) for the Groundwater OU was completed,
and an interim ROD was issued (CH2M, 1994). The interim ROD required additional actions, including
replacement of the existing groundwater treatment plant and sealing and abandonment of on-site water
supply wells. In 1996 and 1997, most of the remaining above grade structures were demolished and the
debris was removed and disposed of off site. In 1998, EPA conducted an evaluation of thermal treatment
technologies, including the removal of contaminants from soil and groundwater using steam injection and
groundwater extraction. Steam enhanced extraction was selected in a 2000 ROD for OU2 and OU4 (EPA,
2000a). The 2000 ROD also included a contingency remedy—containment—to be implemented if a pilot
scale study of steam enhanced extraction could not meet cleanup goals.

In 2001, a steel sheet pile wall was constructed around the perimeter of the FPA. A smaller sheet pile wall
was also constructed around an area of heavily contaminated soils near the center of the FPA that had been
selected for the pilot study. The pilot study began in October 2002. Equipment problems hampered
operations, and the pilot study was terminated in April 2003. The most serious problems encountered were
aspiration of liquid by the vapor-vacuum pumps, overloading of the water treatment system, and clogging of
pipes and treatment facilities by naphthalene precipitation.
Although the pilot treatment system encountered many operating problems, it was successful in that it
enabled EPA to evaluate the technology. Through that test, EPA determined that cleanup goals for the
Groundwater OU could not be met using steam enhanced extraction. Therefore, EPA began to implement
the contingency remedy—containment—in 2004. The aging groundwater treatment system was replaced in
2010. The containment remedy is still in operation today, and consists of the following components:
• Groundwater Extraction and Treatment System—The groundwater extraction system consists of nine
recovery wells screened in the upper aquifer. These wells draw groundwater and nonaqueous-phase
liquid (NAPL) away from the facility perimeter and toward the extraction wells. Ecology has been
operating the groundwater extraction and treatment system since 2012.
• Perimeter Wall—The interlocking steel sheet pile wall was constructed around the FPA’s west, north,
and east sides to prevent contaminant release to Eagle Harbor. The wall is more than 1,800 feet long. It
extends from above the ground downward into a confining layer 25 to 80 feet below ground surface.
• Long-Term Monitoring—A monitoring program provides data on water levels in both the upper and
lower aquifers beneath the FPA (for confirming hydraulic containment), and on contaminant distribution
and movement in the subsurface. Monitoring is ongoing.
• Engineering Controls—Engineering controls (for example, fencing) and access controls have been
implemented to restrict site use, thereby preventing direct exposure to surface soils.
2.3 Previous Investigations and Cleanup Actions in OU1 (East Harbor)
The 1989 RI revealed extensive polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) contamination of surface and shallow
subsurface sediments in Eagle Harbor (CH2M, 1989). To address this contamination, EPA implemented a
time-critical removal action to cap more than 54 acres of contaminated sediments. Capping began in
September 1993 and was completed in March 1994. The cap covered contaminated sediments under a thick
(1 to 5 feet) layer of clean sand. Capping was selected as the primary remedy for sediment contamination in
the 1994 ROD, with MNR in the intertidal beaches, which is the subject of this document. The cap was
extended in several phases and now covers more than 70 acres, as shown in Figure 2.
In 2001, EPA installed the perimeter pile wall (described above) around the west, north, and east sides of
the FPA. The wall stopped the discharge of contaminated soil, groundwater, and NAPL to the beaches,
allowing the process of natural recovery to begin.
In 2005, EPA received reports from citizens about odors and sheen on the beach west of the FPA. EPA
investigated, determined the extent of residual creosote contamination, and designed a three-layer cap
called an exposure barrier system (EBS) to cover the contaminated portion of the beach. EPA documented
this additional cleanup decision, which amended the 1994 ROD, in a 2007 Explanation of Significant
Differences (ESD; EPA, 2007). The EBS was built in 2008.
In 2012, EPA determined that cleanup levels had not been met in the intertidal beaches adjacent to the FPA,
despite 10 years of MNR following source control measures. After making this determination, EPA began a
focused feasibility study (FFS) to evaluate the extent of NAPL remaining in the beaches. EPA found NAPL
seeps in two areas—East Beach and North Shoal. Creosote is visible when the beaches are exposed at low
tide, and it generates sheens and odor on the beach surface. Portions of the beaches remain contaminated
with PAHs at concentrations above ROD cleanup levels. In the Focused Feasibility Study Wyckoff/Eagle
Harbor Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (CH2M, 2016a), EPA evaluated a range of cleanup options to address
the remaining contamination.
In 2017, the EPA repaired a portion of the original cap in Eagle Harbor. State ferry operations had caused
erosion of the cap in the vessel traffic lane near the ferry terminal, exposing contaminated sediment. The
repair included placing new sand over 9 acres of the cap, and armoring 4 acres of the repair area with a rock
layer to prevent future erosion. A Regulated Navigation Area (Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Title 33,
Part 165.1307) prohibits anchoring, dredging, or other activities that could disturb the cap.
2.4 Previous Investigations and Cleanup Actions in OU3 (West Harbor)
The EPA’s 1989 RI of Eagle Harbor (CH2M, 1989) included intertidal and subtidal sediment sampling and
analysis across a large portion of the harbor. The RI revealed an area of metal-contaminated sediment
offshore of the former shipyard on the harbor’s north side. EPA issued an initial cleanup decision for the
shipyard (EPA, 1992), then amended the cleanup decision in December 1995 (EPA, 1995a). The remedy
included upland source control measures, including soil stabilization and capping; a tidal barrier system to
minimize contaminant seeps from the site to the adjacent beach; capping of contaminated sediments; and
institutional controls (ICs). The cleanup was completed in 1997. The former shipyard is currently used by the
Washington Department of Transportation for maintenance of state ferries. Because the remedy is
functioning as designed and no additional actions are planned, OU3 is not discussed further in this RODA.
2.5 History of Enforcement Actions
EPA issued an order requiring the Wyckoff Company to conduct environmental investigations in 1984. In July
1988, EPA ordered the company to install groundwater extraction wells and a groundwater treatment plant
to halt continuing releases of wood-treating contaminants to Eagle Harbor. The facility ceased operations in
1988, and the company was renamed Pacific Sound Resources (PSR).
A settlement with PSR—covering both the Wyckoff facility and a wood-treating facility in Seattle—was
embodied in a consent decree entered in federal district court in August 1994. The decree created the PSR
Environmental Trust, into which the heirs of the Wyckoff Company founders, owners, and operators placed
all ownership rights and shares in the company. This allowed the trust to maximize liquidation of all
company assets. The beneficiaries of the trust are the United States Department of Interior, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Suquamish and Muckleshoot Tribes as Natural Resource
Trustees, as well as EPA (the Superfund trust fund) for reimbursement of Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) remedial costs.
Proceeds from the trust funded early cleanup activities and natural resource restoration projects, both at
the Wyckoff facility and at a sister facility in Seattle. However, collections from the trust, which totaled less
than $20 million, were dwarfed by substantial cleanup costs at the two facilities. To date, EPA has spent
more than $180 million on site investigations and cleanup actions at the Wyckoff Site. In 2012, EPA
conducted a search for additional potentially responsible parties and did not discover any other viable
parties who could be liable for EPA response costs.
3.0 Community and Tribal Participation
EPA and Ecology coordinated closely throughout the development of the OU1 FFS (CH2M, 2016a) and held
regular meetings with a community stakeholder group to share investigation results and answer questions
from community members. The draft final OU1 FFS, addressing contamination remaining in the intertidal
beaches, was made available to the public in April 2016, along with the Proposed Plan for Amending the
Records of Decision for the Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor Superfund Site (Operable Units 1, 2, and 4) (Proposed Plan;
EPA, 2016a). These as well as other relevant Site documents can be found in the Administrative Record for
the Proposed Plan.
